CHAPTER I

    _--I was wayward, bold, and wild;
    A self-willed imp; a grandame's child;
    But, half a plague and half a jest,
    Was still endured, beloved, carest._

                                             Walter Scott


I have heard it remarked, that he who writes his own history ought to
possess Irish humour, Scotch prudence, and English sincerity;--the
first, that his work may be read; the second that it may be read without
injury to himself; the third, that the perusal of it may be profitable
to others. I might, perhaps, with truth declare, that I possess only the
last of these qualifications. But, besides that my readers will probably
take the liberty of estimating for themselves my merits as a narrator, I
suspect, that professions of humility may possibly deceive the professor
himself; and that, while I am honestly confessing my disqualifications,
I may be secretly indemnifying my pride, by glorying in the candour of
my confession.

Any expression of self-abasement might, indeed, appear peculiarly
misplaced as a preface to whole volumes of egotism; the world being
generally uncharitable enough to believe, that vanity may somewhat
influence him who chooses himself for his theme. Nor can I be certain
that this charge is wholly inapplicable to me; since it is notorious to
common observation, that, rather than forego their darling subject, the
vain will expatiate even on their errors. A better motive, however,
mingles with those which impel me to relate my story. It is no unworthy
feeling which leads such as are indebted beyond return, to tell of the
benefits they have received; or which prompts one who has escaped from
eminent peril, to warn others of the danger of their way.

It is, I believe, usual with those who undertake to be their own
biographers, to begin with tracing their illustrious descent. I fear
this portion of my history must be compiled from very scanty materials;
for my father, the only one of the race who was ever known to me, never
mentioned his family, except to preface a philippic against all
dignities in church and state. Against these he objected, as fostering
'that aristocratical contumely, which flesh and blood cannot endure'; a
vice which I have heard him declare to be, above all others, the object
of his special antipathy. For this selection, which will probably obtain
sympathy only from the base-born, my father was not without reason; for,
to the pride of birth it was doubtless owing that my grandfather, a
cadet of an ancient family, was doomed to starve upon a curacy, in
revenge for his contaminating the blood of the Percys by an unequal
alliance; and, when disappointment and privation had brought him to an
early grave, it was probably the same sentiment which induced his
relations to prolong his punishment in the person of his widow and
infants, who, with all possible dignity and unconcern, were left to
their fate. My father, therefore, began the world with very slender
advantages; an accident of which he was so far from being ashamed, that
he often triumphantly recorded it, ascribing his subsequent affluence to
his own skill and diligence alone.

He was, as I first recollect him, a muscular dark-complexioned man, with
a keen black eye, cased in an extraordinary perplexity of wrinkle, and
shaded by a heavy beetling eyebrow. The peculiarity of his face was a
certain arching near the corner of his upper lip, to which it was
probably owing that a smile did not improve his countenance; but this
was of the less consequence, as he did not often smile. He had, indeed,
arrived at that age when gravity is at least excusable; although no
trace of infirmity appeared in his portly figure and strong-sounding
tread.

His whole appearance and demeanour were an apt contrast to those of my
mother, in whose youthful form and features symmetry gained a charm from
that character of fragility which presages untimely decay, and that air
of melancholy which seems to welcome decline. I have her figure now
before me. I recollect the tender brightness of her eyes, as laying her
hand upon my head, she raised them silently to heaven. I love to
remember the fine flush that was called to her cheek by the fervour of
the half-uttered blessing. She was, in truth, a gentle being; and bore
my wayward humour with an angel's patience. But she exercised a control
too gentle over a spirit which needed to be reined by a firmer hand than
hers. She shrunk from bestowing even merited reproof, and never
inflicted pain without suffering much more than she caused. Yet, let not
these relentings of nature be called weakness--or if the stern morality
refuse to spare, let it disarm his severity, to learn that I was an only
child.

I know not whether it was owing to the carelessness of nurses, or the
depravity of waiting-maids, or whether, 'to say all, nature herself
wrought in me so'; but, from the earliest period of my recollection, I
furnished an instance at least, if not a proof, of the corruption of
human kind; being proud, petulant, and rebellious. Some will probably
think the growth of such propensities no more unaccountable than that of
briars and thorns; being prepared, from their own experience and
observation, to expect that both should spring without any particular
culture. But whoever is dissatisfied with this compendious deduction,
may trace my faults to certain accidents in my early education.

I was, of course, a person of infinite importance to my mother. While
she was present, her eye followed my every motion, and watched every
turn of my countenance. Anxious to anticipate every wish, and vigilant
to relieve every difficulty, she never thought of allowing me to pay the
natural penalties of impatience or self-indulgence. If one servant was
driven away by my caprice, another attended my bidding. If my toys were
demolished, new baubles were ready at my call. Even when my mother was
reluctantly obliged to testify displeasure, her coldness quickly yielded
to my tears; and I early discovered, that I had only to persevere in the
demonstrations of obstinate sorrow, in order to obtain all the
privileges of the party offended. When she was obliged to consign me to
my maid, it was with earnest injunctions that I should be
amused,--injunctions which it every day became more difficult to fulfil.
Her return was always marked by fond inquiries into my proceedings
during her absence; and I must do my attendants the justice to say, that
their replies were quite as favourable as truth would permit. They were
too politic to hazard, at once, my favour and hers, by being officiously
censorious. On the contrary, they knew how to ingratiate themselves, by
rehearsing my witticisms, with such additions and improvements as made
my original property in them rather doubtful. My mother, pleased with
the imposition, usually listened with delight; or, if she suspected the
fraud, was too gentle to repulse it with severity, and too partial
herself, to blame what she ascribed to a kindred partiality. On my
father's return from the counting-house, my double rectified _bon mots_
were commonly repeated to him, in accents low enough to draw my
attention, as to somewhat not intended for my ear, yet so distinct as
not to balk my curiosity. This record of my wit served a triple purpose.
It confirmed my opinion of my own consequence, and of the vast
importance of whatever I was pleased to say or do: it strengthened the
testimony which my mother's visiters bore to my miraculous prematurity;
and it established in my mind that association so favourable to feminine
character, between repartee and applause!

To own the truth, my mother lay under strong temptation to report my
sallies, for my father always listened to them with symptoms of
pleasure. They sometimes caused his countenance to relax into a smile;
and sometimes, either when they were more particularly brilliant, or his
spirits in a more harmonious tone, he would say, 'Come, Fanny, get me
something nice for supper, and keep Ellen in good humour, and I won't go
to the club to-night.' He generally, however, had reason to repent of
this resolution; for though my mother performed her part to perfection,
I not unfrequently experienced, in my father's presence, that restraint
which has fettered elder wits under a consciousness of being expected to
entertain. Or, if my efforts were more successful, he commonly closed
his declining eulogiums by saying, 'It is a confounded pity she is a
girl. If she had been of the right sort, she might have got into
Parliament, and made a figure with the best of them. But now what use is
her sense of?'--'I hope it will contribute to her happiness,' said my
mother, sighing as if she had thought the fulfilment of her hope a
little doubtful. 'Poh!' quoth my father, 'no fear of her happiness.
Won't she have two hundred thousand pounds, and never know the trouble
of earning it, nor need to do one thing from morning to night but amuse
herself?' My mother made no answer;--so by this and similar
conversations, a most just and desirable connection was formed in my
mind between the ideas of amusement and happiness, of labour and misery.

If to such culture as this I owed the seeds of my besetting sins, at
least, it must be owned that the soil was propitious, for the bitter
root spread with disastrous vigour; striking so deep, that the iron
grasp of adversity, the giant strength of awakened conscience, have
failed to tear it wholly from the heart, though they have crushed its
outward luxuriance.

Self-importance was fixed in my mind long before I could examine the
grounds of this preposterous sentiment. It could not properly be said to
rest on my talents, my beauty, or my prospects. Though these had each
its full value in my estimation, they were but the trappings of my idol,
which, like other idols, owed its dignity chiefly to the misjudging
worship which I saw it receive. Children seldom reflect upon their own
sentiments; and their self-conceit may, humanly speaking, be incurable,
before they have an idea of its turpitude, or even of its existence.
During the many years in which mine influenced every action and every
thought, whilst it hourly appeared in the forms of arrogance, of
self-will, impatience of reproof, love of flattery, and love of sway, I
should have heard of its very existence with an incredulous smile, or
with an indignation which proved its power. And when at last I learnt to
bestow on one of its modifications a name which the world agrees to
treat with some respect, I could own that I was even 'proud of my
pride;' representing every instance of a contrary propensity as the
badge of a servile and grovelling disposition.

Meanwhile my encroachments upon the peace and liberty of all who
approached me, were permitted for the very reason which ought to have
made them be repelled,--namely, that I was but a child! I was the
dictatrix of my playfellows, the tyrant of the servants, and the
idolised despot of both my parents. My father, indeed, sometimes
threatened transient rebellion, and announced opposition in the tone of
one determined to conquer or die; but, though justice might be on his
side, perseverance, a surer omen of success, was upon mine. Hour after
hour, nay, day after day, I could whine, pout, or importune, encouraged
by the remembrance of former victories. My obstinacy always at length
prevailed, and of course gathered strength for future combat. Nor did it
signify how trivial might be the matter originally in dispute. Nothing
could be unimportant which opposed my sovereign will. That will became
every day more imperious; so that, however much it governed others, I
was myself still more its slave, knowing no rest or peace but in its
gratification. I had often occasion to rue its triumphs, since not even
the cares of my fond mother could always shield me from the consequences
of my perverseness; and by the time I had reached my eighth year, I was
one of the most troublesome, and, in spite of great natural hilarity of
temper, at times one of the most unhappy beings, in that great
metropolis which contains such variety of annoyance and of misery.

Upon retracing this sketch of the progress and consequences of my early
education, I begin to fear, that groundless censure may fall upon the
guardians of my infancy; and that defect of understanding or of
principle may be imputed to those who so unsuccessfully executed their
trust. Let me hasten to remove such a prejudice. My father's
understanding was respectable in the line to which he chose to confine
its exertions. Indifference to my happiness or my improvement cannot
surely be alleged against him, for I was the pride of his heart. I have
seen him look up from his newspaper, while reading the 'shipping
intelligence,' or the opposition speeches, to listen to the praises of
my beauty or my talents; and, except when his temper was irritated by my
perverseness, I was the object of his almost exclusive affection. But he
was a man of business. His days were spent in the toil and bustle of
commerce; and, if the evening brought him to his home, it was not
unnatural that he should there seek domestic peace and relaxation,--a
purpose wholly incompatible with the correction of a spoiled child. My
mother was indeed one of the finer order of spirits. She had an elegant,
a tender, a pious mind. Often did she strive to raise my young heart to
Him from whom I had so lately received my being. But, alas! her too
partial fondness overlooked in her darling the growth of that pernicious
weed, whose shade is deadly to every plant of celestial origin. She
continued unconsciously to foster in me that spirit of pride, which may
indeed admit the transient admiration of excellence, or even the passing
fervours of gratitude, but which is manifestly opposite to vital
piety;--to that piety which consists in a surrender of self-will, of
self-righteousness, of self in every form, to the Divine justice,
holiness, and sovereignty. It was, perhaps, for training us to this
temper, of such difficult, yet such indispensable attainment, that the
discipline of parental authority was intended. I have long seen reason
to repent the folly which deprived me of the advantages of this useful
apprenticeship, but this conviction has been the fruit of discipline far
more painful.

In the mean time, my self-will was preparing for me an immediate
punishment, and eventually a heavy, and irremediable misfortune. I had
just entered my ninth year, when one evening an acquaintance of my
mother's sent me an invitation to her box in the theatre. As I had been
for some days confined at home by a cold, and sore throat, my mother
judged it proper to refuse. But the message had been unwarily delivered
in my hearing, and I was clamorous for permission to go. The danger of
compliance being, in this instance, manifest, my mother resisted my
entreaties with unwonted firmness. After arguing with me, and soothing
me in vain, she took the tone of calm command, and forbade me to urge
her further. I then had recourse to a mode of attack which I often found
successful, and began to scream with all my might. My mother, though
with tears in her eyes, ordered a servant to take me out of the room.
But, at the indignity of plebeian coercion, my rage was so nearly
convulsive, that, in terror, she consented to let me remain, upon
condition of quietness. I was, however, so far from fulfilling my part
of this compact, that my father, who returned in the midst of the
contest, lost patience; and, turning somewhat testily to my mother,
said, 'The child will do herself more harm by roaring there, than by
going to fifty plays.'

I observed (for my agonies by no means precluded observation) that my
mother only replied by a look, which seemed to say that she could have
spared this apostrophe; but my father growing a little more out of
humour as he felt himself somewhat in the wrong, chose to answer to that
look, by saying, in an angry tone, 'It really becomes you well, Mrs
Percy, to pretend that I spoil the child, when you know you can refuse
her nothing.'

'That, I fear,' said my mother, with a sigh, 'will be Ellen's great
misfortune. Her dispositions seem such as to require restraint.'

'Poh!' quoth my father, 'her dispositions will do well enough. A woman
is the better for a spice of the devil!'--an aphorism, which we have
owed at first to some gentleman who, like my father, had slender
experience in the pungencies of female character.

Gathering hopes from this dialogue, I redoubled my vociferation, till my
father, out of all patience, closed the contest, as others had been
closed before, by saying, 'Well, well, you perverse, ungovernable brat,
do take your own way, and have done with it.' I instantly profited by
the permission, was dressed, and departed for the play.

I paid dearly for my triumph. The first consequence of it was a
dangerous fever. My mother,--but what words can do justice to the cares
which saved my quivering life; what language shall paint the tenderness
that watched my restless bed, and pillowed my aching temples on her
bosom; that shielded from the light the burning eye, and warded from
every sound the morbid ear; that persevered in these cares of love till
nature failed beneath the toil, and till, with her own precious life,
she had redeemed me from the grave! My mother--first, fondest love of my
soul! is this barren, feeble record, the only return I can make for all
thy matchless affection?

After hanging for three weeks upon the very brink of the grave, I
recovered. But anxiety and fatigue had struck to the gentlest, the
kindest of hearts; and she to whom I twice owed my life, was removed
from me before I had even a thought of my vast debt of gratitude. For
some months her decline was visible to every eye, except that of the
poor heedless being who had most reason to dread its progress. Yet even
I, when I saw her fatigued with my importunate prattle, or exhausted by
my noisy merriment, would check my spirits, soften my voice to a
whisper, and steal round her sofa on tiptoe. Ages would not efface from
my mind the tenderness with which she received these feeble attributes
of an affection, alas! so dearly earned. By degrees, the constant
intercourse which had been the blessing of my life was exchanged for
short occasional visits to my mother's chamber. Again these were
restricted to a few moments, while the morning lent her a short-lived
vigour; and a few more, while I received her evening blessing.

At length three days passed, in which I had not seen my mother. I was
then summoned to her presence; and, full of the improvident rapture of
childhood, I bounded gaily to her apartment. But all gladness fled, when
my mother, folding me in her arms, burst into a feeble cry, followed by
the big convulsive sob which her weakness was unable to repress. Many a
time did she press her pale lips to every feature of my face; and often
strove to speak, but found no utterance. An attendant, who was a
stranger to me, now approached to remove me, saying, that my mother
would injure herself. In the dread of being parted from her child, my
fond parent found momentary strength; and, still clinging to me, hid her
face on my shoulder, and became more composed. 'Ellen,' said she, in a
feeble broken voice, 'lift up thy little hands, and pray that we may
meet again.' Unconscious of her full meaning, I knelt down by her; and,
resting my lifted hands upon her knees as I was wont to do while she
taught me to utter my infant petitions, I said, 'Oh! let mamma see her
dear Ellen again!' Once more she made me repeat my simple prayer; then,
bending over me, she rested her locked hands upon my head, and the
warmth of a last blessing burst into tremulous interrupted whispers. One
only of these parting benedictions is imprinted on my mind. Wonder
impressed it there at first; and, when nearly effaced by time, the
impression was restored with force irresistible. These were the
well-remembered words: 'Oh be kinder than her earthly parents, and show
thyself a father, though it be in chastising.'

Many a tender wish did she breathe, long since forgotten by her
thoughtless child, till at last the accents of love were again lost in
the thick struggling sobs of weakness. Again the attendant offered to
remove me; and I, half-wearied with the sadness of the scene, was not
unwilling to go. Yet I tried to soothe a sorrow which I could not
comprehend, by promising that I would soon return. Once more, with the
strength of agony, my mother pressed me to her bosom; then, turning away
her head, she pushed me gently from her. I was led from her chamber--the
door closed--I heard again the feeble melancholy cry, and her voice was
silent to my ear for ever.

The next day I pleaded in vain to see my mother. Another came, and every
face looked mournfully busy. I saw not my father; but the few domestics
who approached me, gazed sadly on my childish pastime, or uttered an
expression of pity, and hurried away. Unhappily, I scarcely knew why, I
remembered my resort in all my little distresses, and insisted upon
being admitted to my mother. My attendant long endeavoured to evade
compliance, and when she found me resolute, was forced to tell the
melancholy truth. She had so often combated my wilfulness by deceit,
that I listened without believing; yet, when I saw her serious
countenance, something like alarm added to my impatience, and, bursting
from her, I flew to my mother's chamber.

The door which used to fly open at my signal was fastened, and no one
answered my summons; but the key remained in the lock, and I soon
procured admission. All seemed strangely altered since I saw it last. No
trace appeared of my mother's presence. Here reigned the order and the
stillness of desolation. The curtains were drawn back, and the bed
arranged with more than wonted care: yet it seemed pressed by the
semblance of a human form. I drew away the cover, and beheld my mother's
face. I thought she slept; yet the stern quietness of her repose was
painful to me. 'Wake, dear mamma,' I hastily cried, and wondered when
the smile of love answered not my call. I reached my hand to touch her
cheek, and started at its coldness; yet, still childishly incredulous of
my loss, I sprang upon the bed, and threw my arm round her neck.

A frightful shriek made me turn, and I beheld my attendant stretching
her arms towards me, as if fearing to approach. Her looks of horror and
alarm,--her incoherent expressions,--the motionless form before me, at
last convinced me of the truth; and all the vulgar images of death and
sepulture rushing on my mind, I burst into agonies of mingled grief and
fear. To be carried hence by strangers, laid in the earth, shut out for
ever from the light and from me!--I clung to the senseless clay,
resolved, while I had life, to shield my dear mother from such a fate.

My cries assembled the family, who attempted to withdraw me from the
scene. In vain they endeavoured to persuade or to terrify me. I
continued to hang on the bosom which had nourished me, and to mingle my
cries of Mother! mother! with vows that I would never leave her, not
though they should hide me with her in the earth. At last my father
commanded the servants to remove me by force. In vain I struggled and
shrieked in anguish. I was torn from her,--and the tie was severed for
ever!




CHAPTER II

    _Such little wasps, and yet so full of spite;
    For bulk mere insects, yet in mischief strong._

                                             Tate's Juvenal


For some hours I was inconsolable; but at length tired nature befriended
me, and I wept myself to sleep. The next morning, before I was
sufficiently awake for recollection, I again, in a confused sense of
pain, began my instinctive wailing. I was, however, somewhat comforted
by the examination of my new jet ornaments; and the paroxysms of my
grief thenceforth returned at lengthening intervals, and with abating
force. Yet when I passed my mother's chamber-door, and remembered that
all within was desolate, I would cast myself down at the threshold, and
mix with shrieks of agony the oft-repeated cry of Mother! mother! Or,
when I was summoned to the parlour, where no one now was concerned to
promote my pastimes, or remove my difficulties, or grant my
requests,--on the failure of some of my little projects, I would lean my
head on her now vacant seat, and vent a quieter sorrow, till reproof
swelled it into loud lamentation.

These passing storms my father found to be very hostile to the calm
which he had promised himself in a fortnight of decent seclusion from
the cares of the counting-house. Besides, I became, in other respects,
daily more troublesome. The only influence which could bend my stubborn
will being now removed, he was hourly harassed with complaints of my
refractory conduct. It was constantly, 'Sir, Miss Ellen won't go to
bed,'--'Sir, Miss Ellen won't get up,'--'Sir, Miss Ellen won't have her
hair combed,'--'Sir, Miss Ellen won't learn her lesson.' My father
having tried his authority some half-a-dozen times in vain, declared,
not without reason, that the child was completely spoiled; so, by way
of a summary cure for the evil, so far at least as it affected himself,
he determined to send me to a fashionable boarding-school.

In pursuance of this determination I was conveyed to ---- House, then
one of the most polite seminaries of the metropolis, and committed to
the tuition of Madame Duprè. My father, who did not pique himself on his
acquaintance with the mysteries of education, gave no instructions in
regard to mine, except that expense should not be spared on it; and he
certainly never found reason to complain that this injunction was
neglected. For my own part, I submitted, without opposition, to the
change in my situation. The prospect of obtaining companions of my own
age reconciled me to quitting the paternal roof, which I had of late
found a melancholy abode.

A school,--it has been observed so often, that we are all tired of the
observation,--a school is an epitome of the world. I am not even sure
that the bad passions are not more conspicuous in the baby commonwealth,
than among the 'children of a larger growth;' since, in after-life,
experience teaches some the policy of concealing their evil
propensities; while others, in a course of virtuous effort, gain
strength to subdue them. Be that as it may, I was scarcely domesticated
in my new abode ere I began at once to indulge and to excite the most
unamiable feelings of our nature.

'What a charming companion Miss Percy will make for Lady Maria,' said
one of the teachers to another who was sitting near her. 'Yes,' returned
the other in a very audible whisper, 'and a lovely pair they are.' The
first speaker, directing to me a disapproving look, lowered her voice,
and answered something of which only the words 'not to be compared'
reached my ear. The second, with seeming astonishment at the sentiments
of her opponent, and a glance of complacency to me, permitted me to hear
that the words 'animation,' 'sensibility,' 'intelligence,' formed part
of her reply. The first drew up her head, giving her antagonist a
disdainful smile; and the emphatical parts of her speech were, 'air of
fashion,' 'delicacy,' 'mien of noble birth,' &c. &c. A comparison was
next instituted aloud between the respective ages of Lady Maria and
myself; and at this point of the controversy, the said Lady Maria
happened to enter the room.

I must confess that I had reason to be flattered by any personal
comparison between myself and my little rival, who was indeed one of the
loveliest children in the world. So dazzling was the fairness of her
complexion, so luxuriant her flaxen hair, so bright her large blue
eyes, that, in my approbation of her beauty, I forgot to draw from the
late conversation an obvious inference in favour of my own. But I was
not long permitted to retain this desirable abstraction from self. 'Here
is a young companion for you, Lady Maria,' said the teacher:--'come, and
I will introduce you to each other.'

Her little Ladyship, eyeing me askance, answered, 'I can't come now--the
dress-maker is waiting to fit on my frock.'

'Come hither at once when you are desired, young lady,' said my
champion, in no conciliating tone; and Lady Maria, pouting her pretty
under lip, obeyed.

The teacher, who seemed to take pleasure in thwarting her impatience to
begone, detained her after the introduction, till it should be
ascertained which of us was eldest, and then till we should measure
which was tallest. Lady Maria, who had confessed herself to be two years
older than I was, reddened with mortification when my champion
triumphantly declared me to have the advantage in stature. It was not
till the little lady seemed thoroughly out of humour that she was
permitted to retire; and I saw her no more till we met in school, where
the same lesson was prescribed to both. Desirous that the first
impression of my abilities should be favourable, I was diligent in
performing my task. Perhaps some remains of ill-humour made Lady Maria
neglect hers. Of consequence, I was commended, Lady Maria reproved. Had
the reproof and the commendation extended only to our respective degrees
of diligence, the equitable sentence would neither have inflamed the
conceit of the one, nor the jealousy of the other; but my former
champion, whose business it was to examine our proficiency, incautiously
turned the spirit of competition into a channel not only unprofitable
but mischievous, by making our different success the test of our
abilities, not of our industry; and while I cast a triumphant glance
upon my fair competitor, I saw her eyes fill with tears not quite 'such
as angels shed.'

At length we were all dismissed to our pastimes; and 'every one strolled
off his own glad way;' every one but I; who finding myself, for the
first time in my life, of consequence to nobody, and restrained partly
by pride, partly by bashfulness, from making advances to my new
associates, sat down alone, looking wistfully from one merry party to
another. My attention was arrested by a group more quiet than the rest;
where, however, my new rival seemed to play the orator, speaking very
earnestly to two of her companions, and laying one hand on the shoulder
of each, as if to enforce attention. Her Ladyship spoke in whispers, for
good manners are not hereditary; casting, at intervals, such glances
towards me as showed that I was the subject of remarks not over
laudatory.

Presently the group began to move; and Lady Maria, leading it, as if by
accident, to the place where I sat, accosted me with an air of
restrained haughtiness. 'Pray, Miss Percy,' said she, 'are you of the
Duke of Northumberland's family?'--'No,' answered I.--'What Percys,
then, do you belong to?'--'I belong to my father, Mr. Percy, the great
West India merchant, in Bloomsbury Square,' returned I, not doubting
that my consequence would be raised by this information. To my great
surprise, however, Lady Maria's ideas of my importance did not seem
affected by this intelligence; for she said in a familiar tone, 'But who
was your grandfather, my dear? I suppose you had a grandfather!'--and
she looked round for applause at this sally.

Now it happened that I was then wholly ignorant of the dignity which may
be derived from this relative, having never heard whether I had a
grandfather or not; but I plainly perceived that the question was not
graciously meant; and therefore I answered, with mixed simplicity and
ill-humour, 'Oh! I am not a fool,--I know I must have had a grandfather;
but I think he could not be a duke, for I have heard papa say he had
just five shillings to begin the world with!'

'So, for aught you can tell,' said Lady Maria, shrugging her shoulders
and tittering, 'your father may be the son of a blacksmith or a
cobbler!'

'No, no,' interrupted one of her Ladyship's abettors, 'don't you hear
Miss Percy say that he owed his being to a crown!'

This piece of boarding-school wit seemed to delight Lady Maria, who,
looking me full in the face, burst into a most vociferous fit of
laughter; an impertinence which I resented with more spirit than
elegance, by giving her Ladyship a hearty box on the ear. A moment of
dead silence ensued; the by-standers looking at each in consternation,
while my pretty antagonist collected her breath for screams of pain and
rage.

The superior powers were speedily assembled on the field of conflict;
and the grounds of quarrel were investigated. The incivility of mine
adversaries was reproved; but my more heinous outrage was judged worthy
of imprisonment. In consequence of my being a stranger, it was proposed
that this punishment should be remitted, upon condition of my
apologising to Lady Maria, and promising future good behaviour. With
these conditions, however, I positively refused to comply; declaring
that, if they were necessary to my release, I would remain in
confinement till my father removed me from school. In vain did the
teachers entreat, and Madame Duprè command. I insisted, with sobs of
indignation, that Lady Maria was justly punished for her impertinence;
and stoutly asserted my right to defend myself from aggression. The
maintenance of order required that I should be subdued; and, finding me
altogether inflexible in regard to the terms of capitulation, the
governess, in spite of the wildest transports of my rage, committed me
to close custody.

Left to itself, my fury, by degrees, subsided into sullen resolution.
Conceiving that I had been unjustly treated, I determined not to yield.
This humour lasted till the second day of my captivity, when I began to
entertain some thoughts of a compromise with my dignity. Yet, when the
original terms were again proposed to me without abatement, pride
forbade me to accept what I had so often refused; and I remained another
day in durance. At last, when I was heartily wearied of solitude and
inaction, I received a visit from my champion; and though I had
stubbornly withstood higher authority, I was moved by remembrance of the
favour she had shown me, to consent, that, provided Lady Maria would
humble herself before me for her impertinence, I would apologise for the
blow which I had given. It was now her Ladyship's turn to be obstinate.
She refused to comply; so after another day's confinement I was
liberated unconditionally, as having sufficiently expiated my fault.

From that time an ill-humour prevailed between Lady Maria and myself,
which was kept alive by mutual indications of insolence and ill-will. It
had too little dignity to bear the name of hatred; and might rather be
characterised as a kind of snappishness, watchful to give and to take
offence. Our companions enlisted in our quarrels. By degrees almost
every girl in the school had been drawn to engage on one side or other;
and our mutual bickerings were often carried on with as much rancour as
ever envenomed the contests of Whig and Tory.

Of all my adherents, the last to declare in my favour, the most steady
when fixed, was Miss Juliet Arnold, the daughter of an insurance-broker
lately deceased. Mr Arnold, finding it impossible to derive from himself
or his ancestors sufficient consequence to satisfy his desires, was
obliged to draw for importance upon posterity, by becoming the founder
of a family; therefore, leaving his daughter almost in a state of
dependence, he bequeathed the bulk of a considerable fortune to his son.
This young gentleman calculated that the most frugal way of providing
for his sister would be to aid her in obtaining an establishment. Miss
Juliet Arnold, therefore, was educated to be married.

Let no simple reader, trained by an antiquated grandmother in the
country, imagine my meaning to be that Miss Arnold was practised in the
domestic, the economical, the submissive virtues; that she was skilled
in excusing frailty, enlivening solitude, or scattering sunshine upon
the passing clouds of life!--I only mean that Miss Arnold was taught
accomplishments which were deemed likely to attract notice and
admiration; that she knew what to withdraw from the view, and what to
prepare for exhibition; that she was properly instructed in the value of
settlements; and duly convinced of the degradation and misery of failure
in the grand purpose of a lady's existence. For the rest, nature had
done much to qualify Juliet for her profession; for she had a pliant
temper, and an easy address; she could look undesigning, and flatter
fearlessly; her manners were caressing, her passions cool, and her
person was generally agreeable, without being handsome enough to awaken
the caution of the one sex or the envy of the other. Even when a child,
she had an instinctive preference for companions superior to herself in
rank and fortune; and though she was far from being a general favourite,
was sure to make herself acceptable where she chose to conciliate.

Miss Arnold balanced long between my party and that of Lady Maria de
Burgh. She affected to be equally well inclined to both, and even
assumed the character of mediatrix. An invitation from Lady Maria to
spend the holidays at the seat of her father the Duke of C----, entirely
alienated Miss Arnold from my interests for a time; but just as she had
finished her preparations for the important journey, the fickle dame of
quality transferred her choice of a travelling companion to a young lady
of her own rank, whose holiday festivities she was desirous of sharing
in her turn.

From this time, Miss Arnold was my firm ally. She praised me much,
defended me pertinaciously, and, right or wrong, embraced my opinions.
Of course, she convinced me of her ardent affection for me; and I,
accustomed almost from my birth to love with my whole heart, seized the
first object that promised to fill the place which was now vacant there.
Miss Arnold and I, therefore, became inseparable. We espoused each
other's quarrels, abetted each other's frolics, assisted each other's
plots, and excused each other's misdemeanours. I smuggled forbidden
novels into school for her; and she introduced contraband sweetmeats for
me. In short, to use the language often applied to such confederations,
we were 'great friends.'

This compact was particularly advantageous to me; for having, partly
from nature, partly from habitual confidence of indulgence, a tendency
to blunt plain-dealing, I was altogether inadequate to the invention of
the hundred sly tricks and convenient excuses which I owed to the
superior genius of my confederate. Often when I would have resigned
myself, like a simpleton, to merited reproof, did she, with a bold
flight of imagination, interpose, and bear me through in triumph. If
these efforts of invention had been made in the cause of another, I
might have been tempted to brand them with their proper title; as it
was, I first learnt to pardon them because of their good nature, and
then to admire them for their ingenuity.

Meanwhile our education proceeded _selon les règles_. We were taught the
French and Italian languages; but, in as far as was compatible with
these acquisitions, we remained in ignorance of the accurate science, or
elegant literature to which they might have introduced us. We learnt to
draw landscape; but, secluded from the fair originals of nature, we
gained not one idea from the art, except such as were purely mechanical.
Miss Arnold painted beautiful fans, and I was an adept in the
manufacture of card purses and match figures. But had we been restricted
to the use of such apparel as we could make, I fear we should have been
reduced to even more than fashionable scantiness of attire. The
advertisements from ---- House protested that 'the utmost attention
should be paid to the morals of the pupils;' which promise was
performed, by requiring, that every Sunday afternoon, we should repeat
by rote a page of the Catechism, after which we were sent 'forth to
meditate, at even tide,' in the Park. We were instructed in the art of
wearing our clothes fashionably, and arranging our decorations with
grace and effect; but as for 'the ornaments of a meek and quiet spirit,'
they were in no higher estimation at ---- House than 'wimples and round
tires like the moon.'

At the end of seven years of laborious and expensive trifling, the only
accomplishment, perhaps, in which I had attained real proficiency, was
music. I had naturally a clear voice, a delicate ear, and a strong
sensibility to sweet sounds; but I should never have exercised the
perseverance necessary to excellence, had it not been from emulation of
Lady Maria de Burgh. This stimulant, of doubtful character, even when
untainted with the poison of enmity, operated so effectually, that I at
last outstripped all my competitors; and my musical powers were
pronounced equal to any which the public may command for hire. This
acquisition (I blush whilst I write it) cost me the labour of seven
hours a day!--full half the time which, after deducting the seasons of
rest and refreshment, remained for all the duties of a rational, a
social, an immortal being! Wise Providence! was it to be squandered
thus, that leisure was bestowed upon a happy few!--leisure, the most
precious distinction of wealth!--leisure, the privilege of Eden! for
which fallen man must so often sigh and toil in vain!

Not such were the sentiments with which at sixteen I reviewed my
acquirements. I considered them as not less creditable to my genius and
industry, than suitable to the sphere in which I expected to move; and I
earnestly longed to exhibit them in a world which my imagination peopled
with admiring friends. I had, besides, an indistinct desire to challenge
notice for gifts of more universal attraction. I knew that I was rich; I
more than half suspected that I was handsome; and my heart throbbed to
taste the pleasures and the pomps of wealth, but much more to claim the
respectful homage, the boundless sway, which I imagined to be the
prerogative of beauty.

In the summer of my sixteenth year, Lady Maria was removed from school
to accompany the duchess her mother, on a tour to the watering places;
and the accounts with which she favoured her less fortunate companions,
of her dresses, her amusements, and her beaux, stimulated my impatience
for release. My father at last yielded to my importunities; and
consented, that, at the beginning of the fashionable winter, I should
enter a world which looked so alluring from afar; where the objects,
like sparks glittering in the distant fallow, flashed with a splendour
which they owed only to the position of the eye that gazed on them.




CHAPTER III

    _Lamented goodness!--Yet I see
      The fond affection melting in her eye.
    She bends its tearful orb on me,
      And heaves the tender sigh;
    As thoughtful she the toils surveys,
    That crowd in life's perplexing maze._

                                             Langhorne


My father signalised my return from school by a change in his mode of
life. He had been accustomed to repair regularly every morning at ten
o'clock, to the counting-house; and there, or upon 'Change, he spent the
greater part of the day in a routine of business, which twenty years had
seen uninterrupted, save by the death of my mother, and a weekly journey
to his villa at Richmond, where he always spent Saturday and Sunday.
Upon placing me at the head of his establishment, my father, not aware
of the difference between possessing leisure and enjoying it, determined
to shake off, in part, the cares of business, and to exchange a life of
toil for one of recreation, or rather of repose. Upon this account, and
tempted by a valuable consideration, he admitted into the house a junior
partner, who undertook to perform all the drudgery of superintending one
of the most extensive mercantile concerns in London, while my father
retained a large share of the profits.

At the Christmas holidays I quitted school, impatient to enter on the
delights of womanhood. My father, whose ideas of relaxation were all
associated with his villa at Richmond, determined that I should there
spend the time which intervened before the commencement of the gay
winter. In compliance with my request, he invited Miss Arnold, whose
liberation took place at the same time with my own, to spend a few weeks
with me,--an invitation which was gladly accepted.

This indulgence, however, was somewhat balanced by the presence of a
very different companion. My mother was a woman of real piety; and to
her was accorded that 'medicine of life,' which respectable authority
has assigned exclusively to persons of that character. She had a
'faithful friend.' This friend still survived, and in her my father
sought a kind and judicious adviser for my inexperience. He pressed her
to make his house her permanent abode, and to share with him in the
government of my turbulent spirit, until it should be consigned to other
authority. Miss Elizabeth Mortimer, therefore, though she refused to
relinquish entirely the independence of a home, left her cottage for a
while to the care of her only maid-servant; and rejoicing in an occasion
of manifesting affection for her departed friend, and pleasing herself
with the idea that one bond of sympathy yet remained between them,
prepared to revive her friendship to the mother in acts of kindness to
the child.

I regret to say that she was received with sentiments much less
amicable. Miss Arnold and I considered her as a spy upon our actions,
and a restraint upon our pleasures. We called her Argus and duenna;
voted her a stick, a bore, a quiz, or, to sum up all reproach in one
comprehensive epithet, a Methodist. Not that she really was a sectary.
On the contrary, she was an affectionate and dutiful daughter of the
establishment, countenancing schismatics no further, than by adopting
such of their doctrines and practices as are plainly scriptural, and by
testifying towards them, on all occasions, whether of opposition or
conformity, a charity which evinced the divinity of its own origin. But
Miss Mortimer displayed a practical conviction, that grey hairs ought to
be covered with a cap; and that a neck of five-and-forty is the better
for a handkerchief; she attended church regularly; was seldom seen in a
public place; and, above all, was said to have the preposterous custom
of condescending to join her own servants in daily prayer. Miss Arnold
and I were persuaded that our duenna would attempt to import this
'pernicious superstition' into her new residence, and we resolved upon a
vigorous resistance of her authority.

Our spirit, however, was not put to the proof. Miss Mortimer affected no
authority. She seemed indeed anxious to be useful, but afraid to be
officious. She was even so sparing of direct advice, that, had she not
been the most humble of human beings, I should have said that she
trusted to the dignity and grace of her general sentiments, and the
beautiful consistency of her example, for effecting the enormous
transition from what I was to what I ought to be.

Her gentleness converted the dislike of her charge into feelings
somewhat less hostile. My friend and I could find nothing offensive in
her singularities; we therefore attempted to make them amusing. We
invented dismal cases of calamity, and indited piteous appeals to her
charity, making her often trudge miles over the snow in search of
fictitious objects of compassion; that we might laugh at the credulity
which was never deaf to the cry of want, and at the principle which
refused to give without enquiry. We hid her prayer-book; purloined her
hoards of baby linen and worsted stockings; and pasted caricatures on
the inside of her pew in church.

Much of the zest of these excellent jokes was destroyed by the calm
temper and perverse simplicity of Miss Mortimer. If by chance she was
betrayed into situations really ludicrous, nobody laughed with more
hearty relish than she. Even on the more annoying of these practical
jests, she smiled with good-natured contempt; never, even by the
slightest glance, directing to Miss Arnold or myself the pity which she
expressed for the folly of the contriver. We could never perceive that
she suspected us of being her persecutors; and her simplicity, whether
real or affected, compelled us to a caution and respect which we would
have renounced had we been openly detected. Our jokes, however, such as
they were, we carried on with no small industry and perseverance; every
day producing some invention more remarkable for mischief than for wit.
At last the tragical issue of one of our frolics inclined me to a
suspension of hostilities; and had it not been for the superior firmness
of my friend Miss Arnold, I believe I should have finally laid down my
arms.

We were invited one day to dine with a neighbouring gentleman, a
widower; whose family of dissipated boys and giddy girls were the chosen
associates of Miss Arnold and myself. My father was otherwise engaged,
and could not go; but Miss Mortimer accepted the invitation, very little
to the satisfaction of the junior members of the party, who had
projected a plan for the evening, with which her presence was likely to
interfere. Miss Arnold and I, therefore, exerted all our ingenuity to
keep her at home. We spilt a dish of tea upon her best silk gown; we
pressed her to eat pine-apple in hopes of exasperating her toothach;
and we related to her a horrible robbery and murder which had been
committed only the night before, in the very lane through which we were
to pass. These and many other contrivances proved ineffectual. As Miss
Mortimer could not wear her best gown, she could go in a worse; she
would not eat pine-apple; and she insisted that those who had committed
the murder only the night before must be bloody-minded indeed if they
were ready to commit another. Next I bribed the coachman to say that the
barouche could not stir till it was repaired; but my father, who, on
this occasion, seemed as determined as Miss Mortimer, insisting that we
should go under her auspices or not go at all, settled that Miss Arnold
should ride, while I drove Miss Mortimer in the curricle.

Highly displeased with this decision, I resolved that Miss Mortimer,
whose forte certainly was not strength of nerve, should rue the mettle
of her charioteer. With this good-natured purpose, I privately arranged
that a race should be run between my steeds, and those which were
mounted by Miss Arnold, and one of the fry which had already begun to
swarm round the rich Miss Percy. We set off quietly enough, but we were
no sooner out of sight of my father's windows, than the signal was
given, and away we flew with the speed of lightning. I saw poor Miss
Mortimer look aghast, though she betrayed no other sign of fear, and I
had a malicious triumph in the thoughts of compelling her to sue for
quarter.

'Is it not better, my dear,' said she at last, 'to drive a little more
deliberately? The road is narrow here, and if we were to run over some
poor creature, I know you would never forgive yourself.'

There was such irresistible mildness in the manner of this
expostulation, that I could not disregard it; and I was checking my
horses at the moment, when my beau, who had fallen behind, suddenly
passed me. He gave them a triumphant smack with his whip, and the
high-mettled animals sprang forward with a vigour that baffled my
opposition: At this moment a decent-looking woman, in standing aside to
let me pass, unfortunately threw herself into the line of his course;
and I felt the horror which I deserved to feel, when my companions, each
bounding over her, left her lying senseless within a step of the
destruction which I had lost the power to avert.

From the guilt of murder I was saved by the fortitude of a stranger. He
boldly seized the rein; and, with British strength of arm turning the
horses short round, they reared, backed, and in an instant overturned
the carriage. The stranger, alarmed by this consequence of his
interference, hastened to extricate Miss Mortimer and myself; while our
jockeys, too intent on the race to look back, were already out of sight.

Miss Mortimer looked pale as death, and trembled exceedingly; yet the
moment she was at liberty she flew to the poor woman, whom the stranger
raised from the ground. They chafed her temples, and administered every
little remedy which they could command, while I stood gazing on her in
inactive alarm. At length she opened her eyes; and so heavy a weight was
lifted from my heart, that I could not refrain from bursting into tears;
but unwilling to exhibit these marks of a reproving conscience, I turned
proudly away.

It soon appeared that the woman was not materially hurt,--the horses,
more sagacious and humane than their riders, having cleared without
striking her. Her cottage was not fifty yards distant from the spot, and
Miss Mortimer, with the stranger, conducted her home; whilst I stood
biting my glove, and affecting to superintend the people who were
raising our overturned vehicle. The charitable pair soon returned.
Neither of us being inclined to mount the curricle again, Miss Mortimer
proposed that we should walk home, and send an apology to our party. But
dreading that the temptation of an evening's _tête-à-tête_ might draw
something like a lecture from Miss Mortimer, I determined to accomplish
my visit; and she consented that we should proceed on foot, giving, at
the same time, permission to her companion to attend us.

I felt a sullen disinclination to talk, and therefore had full leisure
to examine the stranger, whom Miss Mortimer introduced to me by the name
of Maitland, adding that he was her old acquaintance. He was a tall,
erect man, of a figure more athletic than graceful. His features were
tolerably regular, and his eyes the brightest I have ever seen; but he
was deprived of his pretensions to be called handsome, by a certain
_bony_ squareness of countenance, which we on the south side of the
Tweed are accustomed to account a national deformity. His smile was
uncommonly pleasing, either from its contrast with the ordinary cast of
his countenance, or because it displayed the whitest and most regular
teeth in the world; but he smiled so seldom as almost to forfeit these
advantages. His accent was certainly provincial; yet I believe that,
without the assistance of his name, I could not decidedly have
pronounced him to be a Scotchman. His language, however, was that of a
gentleman; always correct, often forcible, and sometimes elegant. But he
spoke little, and his conversation borrowed neither strength nor grace
from his manner, which was singularly calm, motionless, and
unimpassioned.

Either from habitual reserve with strangers, or from particular
disapprobation of me, he addressed himself almost entirely to Miss
Mortimer, paying me no other attentions than bare civility required; and
I, who had already begun to expect far other devoirs, from every man who
accosted me, rejoiced when the conclusion of our walk separated us from
the presumptuous being who had dared to treat me as a secondary person.

As soon as we entered Mr Vancouver's house, my young companions
surrounded me, laughing and hallooing,--'Beaten, beaten,--fairly
beaten!' The victors pressed forward before the rest. 'Down with your
five guineas, Ellen,' cried Miss Arnold.--'Oh! faith 'twas a hollow
thing!' shouted the other. Real sorrow for my fault would have made me
gentle to those of my fellow-transgressors; but the shame of a proud
heart had a contrary effect.--'Take your five guineas,' said I, throwing
them my purse with great disdain, 'and you had better help yourself to a
little more--_that_ will scarcely repay the risk of being tried for
murder.' My ill-humour effected an instantaneous change on the
countenances of the group. Miss Arnold, quite crest-fallen, picked up
the purse, and stood twisting it in her hand, looking very silly, while
she tried to excuse herself, and to throw all the blame upon her
companion. He retorted, and their mutual recriminations were
occasionally renewed during the afternoon; banishing whatever good
humour had been spared by the disappointment which Miss Mortimer had
undesignedly occasioned. At last, to our mutual satisfaction, the party
separated; and Miss Mortimer, with her hopeful charge, returned home.

Never, during the whole day, did a syllable of reproof escape the lips
of Miss Mortimer. She seemed willing to leave me to my conscience, and
confident that its sentence would be just. But when, on retiring for the
night, I could not help exclaiming, 'Thank heaven! this day is
done!'--she took my hand, and said, with a look of great kindness, 'Let
me dispose of one hour of your time to-morrow, dear Ellen, and I will
endeavour to make it pass more agreeably.' I felt no real gratitude for
her forbearance, because I had argued myself, with Miss Arnold's
assistance, into a conviction that Miss Mortimer had no right to
interfere; but I could not withstand the soothing gentleness of her
manner, and therefore promised that I should be at her command at any
hour she pleased.

Next day, therefore, while Miss Arnold was shopping in town, I became
the companion of Miss Mortimer's morning walk; but I own, I began to
repent of my complaisance, when I perceived that she was conducting me
to the cottage of the poor woman who had so nearly been the victim of my
late frolic. 'Is this,' thought I, 'the way that Miss Elizabeth fulfils
her promise of making the hour pass agreeably? Such a finesse might do
mighty well for a methodist; but what would she have said, had I been
the author of it? It is wonderfully delightful to detect the errors of a
saint. On first discovering our destination, my feelings had wavered
between shame and anger; but the detection of Miss Mortimer's supposed
peccadillo restored me to so much self-complacency, that I was able at
least to conceal my reluctance, and entered the cottage with a pretty
good grace.

The apartment was clean and comfortable. The furniture, though simple,
was rather more abundant and more tasteful than is common in the abodes
of labour. Two neat shelves on the wall contained a few books; and in
the window stood a tambouring frame. On one side of the fire-place our
old woman was busy at her spinning-wheel; on the other, in all the ease
of a favourite, lay a beautiful Italian greyhound. Miss Mortimer, with
the frankness of old acquaintance, accosted our hostess, who received
her with respectful kindness. While they were asking and answering
questions of courtesy and good-will, the dog, who had started up on our
entrance, did the honours to me. He looked up in my face, smelled my
clothes, examined me again, and, wagging his tail, seemed to claim
acquaintance. I, too, thought I remembered the animal, though I could
not recollect where I had seen him; and I own, I was glad to relieve a
certain embarrassment which the old woman's presence occasioned me, by
returning his caresses with interest.

'Mrs Wells,' said Miss Mortimer, when she had finished her enquiries, 'I
have brought Miss Percy to visit you.'

In spite of my affected nonchalance, I was not a little relieved when I
discovered, by the old woman's answer, that she had not recognised me as
the author of her accident. 'Miss Ellen!' she exclaimed, as if with
surprise and pleasure. Then taking my hand with a sort of obsequious
affection, she said, 'Dear young lady, I should never have known you
again, you are so grown! and I have never seen you since I lost my best
friend,' added she, shaking her head mournfully. 'Poor Fido,' resumed
she, 'he has more sagacity. He knew you again in a minute.'

'Fido, mamma's Fido!' cried I, and I stooped over the animal to hide the
tears that were rushing to my eyes.

'Yes, miss, your papa sent him here, because he said he did not like to
have him killed, being that he was but a young thing, and the very last
thing that worthy Mrs Percy had ever taken a liking to; and he could not
keep him about the house, because you never set eyes on him but you
cried fit to break your heart. So he sent him here, where he was very
welcome, as he had a good right to be, having belonged to her; for it
was owing to her that I had a home to bring him to.'

'How was that?' enquired I, with some eagerness; for, to this day, my
heart beats warm when I hear the praises of my mother.

'Why, ma'am,' returned she, 'my husband was a sober, industrious man,
but we were unfortunate in working for great people, who never thought
of our wants, because they had no wants of their own. So we became
bankrupt, and that went to my husband's heart; for he had a high spirit.
So he pined and pined away. I sold our little furniture, and then our
clothes; and paid for all honestly, as far as it would go. But what with
the doctors and what with the funeral, my two poor little girls and I
were quite destitute. I believe it was the second night after my Thomas
was laid in his grave, that my youngest girl was crying for bread, and I
had none to give her. I saw the eldest cry too; but she said it was not
for hunger. So, with one thing and another, I was desperate, and told
the children I would go and beg for them. The little one bid me go, for
she was hungry; but Sally said I should never beg for her, and followed
me to the door, holding me back, and crying bitterly. So, just then,
Providence sent that good spirit, Mrs Percy, by our house, and she
looked so earnestly at us--for it was not in her nature to see any
creature in sorrow, and pass by on the other side:--I thought I could
take courage to speak to her; but, when I tried it, I had not the heart;
for I had never begged before. But when she saw how things were, I did
not need to beg; for she had the heart of a Christian, and the hand of a
princess. She put us into this house, and gave us whatever was really
needful for us. I was a good worker with my needle then, though my eyes
are failing me now; and she got me as much work as I could overtake. She
came, besides, every forenoon herself, and taught my eldest girl to make
gowns, and my youngest to tambour, so that now they can earn their own
bread, and the most part of mine. Yes, Miss Ellen,' continued the woman,
perceiving that she had fixed my pleased attention, 'your worthy mother
did more than this; she brought heavenly hopes to me when I had few
hopes upon earth; she gave pious counsels to my children, and they
minded them the more for coming from so great a lady; so that they are
good girls, and a real comfort to my old age.'

After some further conversation, Miss Mortimer put an end to our visit.
I own I was somewhat struck with the contrast between the cottager's
obligations to my mother and to myself; and I had a desire to place this
matter on a footing less painful to my feelings, or, to speak more
justly, less galling to my pride. For this reason, when we had gone a
few steps from the cottage, I returned, pretending that I had forgotten
my handkerchief. 'Mrs Wells,' said I, 'I have a great desire to possess
Fido,--will you make an exchange with me?' continued I, presenting my
purse to her.

The good woman coloured deeply; and, drawing back with a little air of
stateliness, said, 'You are welcome to poor Fido, ma'am. Indeed, as for
that, your mother's child is welcome to the best I have; but I cannot
think of selling the poor dumb animal. No,' said she, her spirit
struggling with the sob that was rising in her throat, 'I shall be
poorly off indeed, before I sell the least thing that ever was hers.'

I own, I felt myself colour in my turn, as I awkwardly withdrew my
purse; and I had not the confidence to look the woman in the face, while
I said, 'Give me poor Fido, then, for my mother's sake; and perhaps the
time may come when you will allow me the pleasure of assisting you for
my own.'

'One of the girls, ma'am, shall take him to the Park this evening. I
know Miss Mortimer wished to have him, but you have the best right to
him; and I hope you will make him be kindly treated, ma'am; he is used
to kindness.'

I thanked the good woman, promised attention to her favourite, and
hurried away. Fido arrived at the Park that afternoon, and soon became
the most formidable rival of Miss Arnold; nor unjustly, for he was
playful, fawning, and seemingly affectionate,--the very qualities to
which she owed my favour.

'See, my dear Ellen,' said Miss Mortimer, when I rejoined her, 'see how
your mother's mornings were spent.' Had any one but my mother furnished
the subject of this apostrophe; or had my friend Miss Arnold been
present to witness its application, I should certainly have turned it
off, by ridiculing the absurdity of a handsome woman of fashion spending
her time in teaching cottage girls mantua-making and morality. But now,
tenderness stealing on my self-reproach, I only answered with a sigh,
'Ah! my mother was an angel; I must not pretend to resemble her.'

'My dearest child!' cried Miss Mortimer, catching my hand with more
animation than she had ever shown in speaking to me, 'why this ill-timed
humility? Born to such splendid advantages, why should you not aspire to
make your life a practical thanksgiving to the bestower? I acknowledge,
that your own strength is not "sufficient for these things," but He who
has called you to be perfect, will----'

'Oh! pray now, my good Miss Mortimer,' interrupted I, 'give over for
to-day,--I am more than half melancholy already. Ten or a dozen years
hence, I shall attend to all these matters.'

Before my reader comment on the wisdom of this reply, let him examine,
whether there be any more weight in the reasons which delay his own
endeavours after Christian perfection.

Our dialogue was interrupted by the appearance of Mr Maitland, who
alighted at the wicket of the cottage garden, with the intention of
enquiring after the widow; but, upon hearing that she felt no bad
effects from her accident, he gave his horse to his servant, and
accompanied us, or rather Miss Mortimer, to the Park. A few civil
enquiries were indeed, the only notice which he deigned to bestow upon
me; and, to own the truth, I was not at all more gracious to him.

At the door of Sedly Park, stood my father as usual with one arm resting
in the hollow of his back, the other supported by his gold-headed cane;
and he not only discomposed this favourite attitude by offering his hand
to Mr Maitland, but advanced some steps to meet him, a mark of regard
which I do not recollect having seen him bestow on any other visiter. He
followed up this courtesy, by pressing his guest to dine with him, and
Mr Maitland was at length induced to comply; while I stood wondering
what my father could mean, by expending so much civility upon a person
of whom nobody had ever heard before.

I cannot pretend to have made any observations upon Mr Maitland's
manners or conversation during this visit, having previously convinced
myself, that neither was worth observing. After dinner, while he
discoursed with my father and Miss Mortimer, I, agreeably to the polite
practice of many young ladies, formed, apart with Miss Arnold and the
young Vancouvers, a coterie which, if not the most entertaining, was at
least the most noisy part of the company; the sound and form holding due
proportion to the shallowness. My father made some ineffectual attempts
to reduce us to order; and Miss Mortimer endeavoured to dissolve our
combination, by addressing her remarks to me; but I, scarcely answering
her, continued to talk and titter apart with my companions till it was
time for our visiters to depart.

As soon as they were gone, my father strode gravely to the upper end of
the room, planted himself firmly with his back to the fire, and,
knitting his brows, addressed me as I stood at the further
window;--'Miss Percy,' said he 'I do not approve of your behaviour this
afternoon. I have placed you at the head of a splendid establishment,
and I desire you will consider it as your duty to entertain my
guests,--all my guests, Miss Percy.'

A few moments of dead silence followed, and my father quitted the room.

Had this well-deserved reproof been given in private, I might have
acknowledged its justice, but Miss Mortimer and my friend were present
to stimulate my abhorrence of blame; and, as soon as my father
disappeared, I began a surly complaint of his ill humour, wondering
'whether he expected me to sit starched by the side of every tiresome
old fellow he brought to his house, like the wooden cuts of William and
Mary.'

Miss Arnold joined me in ridiculing the absurdity of such an
expectation; but Miss Mortimer took part with my father. 'Indeed, my
dear,' said she, 'you must allow me to say, that Mr Percy's guests, of
whatever age, have an equal right to your attentions. I particularly
wish you had distributed them more impartially to-day; for I would have
had you appear with advantage to Mr Maitland, whom I imagine you would
not have found tiresome and who is certainly not very old.'

'Appear with advantage to Mr Maitland!' exclaimed I:--'oh! now the
murder is out. My father and Miss Mortimer want me to make a conquest of
Stiffy.'

Miss Arnold laughed immoderately at the idea. 'You make a conquest of Mr
Maitland!' repeated Miss Mortimer in her turn, gazing in my face with
grave simplicity; 'no, my dear, that, indeed, surpasses my expectation.
Mr Maitland!' exclaimed she again, in a sort of smiling soliloquy over
her knitting;--'no, that would indeed be too absurd.'

I own my pride was piqued by this opinion of Miss Mortimer's; and I felt
some inclination to convince her, that there was no such violent
absurdity in expecting that a stiff old bachelor should be caught by a
handsome heiress of seventeen. I half determined to institute a
flirtation.

The idea was too amusing to be abandoned, and Mr Maitland soon gave me
an opportunity of commencing my operations. He again visited Sedly Park;
and, in spite of several repulses, I contrived to draw him into
conversation; and even succeeded in obtaining my full share of his
attention. But when he rose to be gone, I recollected with surprise,
that I had spent half an hour without talking much nonsense, or hearing
any. Our second interview was not more effective. At the end of the
third I renounced my attack as utterly hopeless; and should as soon have
thought of shaping a dangler out of Cincinnatus. Mr Maitland's heart,
too, seemed as impregnable as his dignity; and I was glad to forget that
I had ever formed so desperate a project as an attempt upon either.

Our acquaintance, however, continued to make some progress; and if at
any luckless hour I happened to be deserted by more animating
companions, I could pass the time very tolerably with Mr Maitland. I
believe he was a scholar, and to this perhaps he owed that force and
variety of language which was often amusing, independently of the
sentiment which it conveyed. He possessed, besides, a certain dry
sententious humour, of which the effect was heightened by the inflexible
gravity of his countenance, and by the low tones of a voice altogether
unambitious of emphasis. His stiffness, which was too gentle for
hauteur, and too self-possessed for bashfulness, was a constitutional or
rather, perhaps, a national reserve; which made some amends for its
repulsive effect upon strangers, by gratifying the vanity of those who
were able to overcome it. I own that I was selfish enough to be
flattered by the distinction which he appeared to make between Miss
Arnold and myself; the more so, because there was, I know not what, in
Mr Maitland, which impressed me with the idea of a sturdy rectitude that
bowed to no extrinsic advantage. This gratification, however, was
balanced by the preference which he constantly showed for Miss Mortimer;
and such was my craving for adulation, that I was at times absolutely
nettled by this preference, although Mr Maitland was some years above
thirty.

Towards the end of our stay at Sedly Park, his visits became more
frequent; but in spite of his company, and that of many other gentlemen
more agreeable to me, I was dying with impatience for our removal to
town. My eagerness increased, when I accidentally heard, that Lady Maria
de Burgh had already started as the reigning beauty of the winter. When
this intelligence was conveyed to me, I was standing opposite to a large
mirror. I glanced towards it, recalled with some contempt the miniature
charms of my fairy competitor, and sprung away to entreat that my father
would immediately remove to town. But my father had already fixed the
fourteenth of January for his removal; and Miss Arnold alleged, that
nothing short of a fire would have hastened his departure, or reduced
him to the degradation of acquainting the family that he had changed his
mind.

The fourteenth of January, however, at length arrived, and I was
permitted to enter the scene of my imaginary triumphs.




CHAPTER IV

    _Next in the daunce followit invy,
    Fild full of feid and fellony,
    Hid malice and dispyte.
    For pryvie haterit that traitour trymlit;
    Him followit mony freik dissymlit,
    With fenyeit wordes quhyte;
    And flattereris into menis facis,
    And back-bytaris in secreit placis,
    To ley that had delyte;
    With rownaris of fals lesingis;
    Allace! that courtis of noble kingis,
    Of thame can nevir be quyte._

                                             Dunbar (Daunce.)


The Countess of ----'s ball was fixed upon as the occasion of my first
appearance. What meditation did it not cost me, to decide upon the style
of my costume for that eventful evening! How did my preference fluctuate
between the gorgeous and the simple, the airy and the magnificent! The
balance was cast in favour of the latter, by the possession of my
mother's jewels; which my father ordered to be reset for me, with superb
additions. 'He could afford it,' he said, 'as well as Lady ---- or any
of her company, and he saw no reason why I should not be as fine as the
proudest of them.' My heart bounded with delight, when I at last saw the
brilliants flash in my dark hair, mark the contour of my neck, and
circle a waist slender as the form of a sylph. All that flattery had
told, and vanity believed, seemed now to gain confirmation; yet, still
some doubts allayed my self-conceit, till it received its consummation
from the cold, the stately Mr Maitland. I overheard Miss Arnold whisper
to him, as I entered the drawing-room where he and a large party were
waiting to escort me, 'look what lovely diamonds Mr Percy has given
Ellen.'--'They would have been better bestowed elsewhere,' returned Mr
Maitland; 'nobody that looks at Miss Percy will observe them.'

Though certain that this compliment was not meant for my ear, I had the
hardihood to acknowledge it, by saying, 'Thank you, sir; I shall put
that into my memorandum-book, and preserve it like a Queen Anne's
farthing, not much worth in itself, but precious, because she never made
but one.'

'The farthing was never meant for circulation,' returned he dryly; 'but
it unluckily fell into the hands of a child, who could not keep it to
herself.'

The word 'child' was particularly offensive on this first night of my
womanhood; and, in the intoxication of my spirits, I should have made
some very impertinent rejoinder, if I had not been prevented by Miss
Mortimer. 'What, Ellen!' said she, 'quarrelling with Mr Maitland for
compliments! Is it not enough to satisfy you, that he who is so seldom
seen in places of that sort accompanies you to the ball to-night?'

'Oh! pray,' returned I, 'since Mr Maitland has so few _bienséances_ to
spare, allow him to dispose of them as he pleases. His attendance
to-night is meant as a compliment to my father.'

'Do not make me pay a whole evening's comfort for what is only a
farthing's worth, you know,' said Maitland good-humouredly; 'but leave
off trying to be disagreeable and witty. Nay, do not frown now; your
face will not have time to recover itself. I see the carriage is at the
door.'

I did not wait for a second intimation, but bounded down stairs, and I
was already seated in the barouche, with Miss Arnold before my
deliberate beau made his appearance. I was too full of expectation to
talk; and we had proceeded for some time in silence, when I was awakened
from a dream of triumph by Mr Maitland's saying, and, as I thought, with
a sigh, 'What a pleasing woman is Miss Mortimer! That feminine
simplicity and sweetness make the merest commonplace delightful!'

I suppose it was my vanity grasping at a monopoly of praise which made
me feel myself teazed by this encomium; and I pettishly answered, 'That
it was a pity Miss Mortimer did not hear this compliment, for she might
keep it to herself, since she at least was no _child_.'

'Within these few years,' said Mr Maitland, 'she was a very enchanting
woman.'

'Indeed!' exclaimed I, more and more out of humour at the unusual warmth
of his expressions, 'Miss Mortimer has no wit, and she has never been
pretty.'

'True,' returned Mr Maitland, 'but I dislike wits. I am not even fond of
beauties. It is in bad taste for a woman to "flash on the startled eye."
Miss Mortimer did not burst on us like a meteor,--she stole on us like
the dawn, cheering and delightful, not dazzling.'

This speech seemed so manifest an attack upon me who dealt with a
certain fearless repartee that passed for wit, and who was already a
beauty by profession, that my eyes filled with tears of mortification.
Of what use is beauty, thought I, if it be thus despised by men of
sense, and draw the gaze only of silly boys? Yet men of sense have felt
its power; and when people have, like Mr Maitland, outlived human
feelings, they should leave the world, and not stay to damp the
pleasures of the young and the happy.

The next moment, however, sparkling eyes and skins of alabaster
recovered their full value in my estimation, when, as we pressed into
Lady ----'s crowded rooms, a hundred whispers met my ear of
'Lovely!'--'Charming!' and 'Devilish handsome!' My buoyant spirits rose
again, and I looked up to take a triumphant survey of my admirers. Yet,
when I met the universal gaze which was attracted by the splendour of my
dress, or the novelty of my appearance, nature for a moment stirred in
me; and though I had indignantly turned from Mr Maitland, and accepted
the devoirs of a more obsequious attendant, I now instinctively caught
his arm, and shrunk awkwardly behind him.

I quickly, however, recovered my self-possession, and began to enjoy the
gaiety of the scene. Not so my companion; who seemed miserably out of
place at a ball, and whose manner appeared even more grave and repulsive
than usual. I shall never forget the solemn abstracted air with which he
sat silently gazing on a chandelier; and then suddenly interrupting my
conversation with a half a dozen beaux, resumed the discussion of a
plan, to which I had listened with interest a few days before, for
bettering the condition of the negroes upon his plantations. But my
attention was at once withdrawn from his discourse, and from the titter
which it occasioned, when a sudden movement opening the circle which
surrounded me, gave to my view the figure of Lady Maria de Burgh.

Never had she looked so lovely. Her Ariel-like form was flying through
the dance; her blue eyes sparkling with pleasure; exercise flushing her
snowy skin with the hues of life and health. I observed the graceful
fall of her white drapery, the unadorned braids of her sunny hair, and
distrusted the taste which had loaded me with ornament.

The dance ended; and Lady Maria was going to throw herself upon a seat,
when it was suddenly taken possession of by a young man, who withdrew my
attention even from Lady Maria. The easy rudeness of this action, his
dress, his manner, his whole air, announced him to be of the first
fashion. He languidly extended a limb of the most perfect symmetry,
viewed it attentively in every direction, drew his fingers through his
elegantly dishevelled hair; then, composing himself into an attitude of
rest, began to examine the company, through an eye-glass set with
brilliants. Lady Maria having, with some difficulty, wedged herself into
a place by his side, was beginning to address him, but he turned from
her with the most fashionable yawn imaginable. Presently his eyes were
directed, or rather fell upon me; and I felt myself inclined to excuse
the plebeian vivacity, with which he instantly pointed me out to his
fair companion, seeming to enquire who I was. Her Ladyship looked, and a
toss of her head seemed to indicate that her reply was not very
favourable. An altercation then appeared to ensue; for the gentleman
rising offered the lady his hand, as if to lead her forward; the lady
frowned, pouted, flounced, and at last, with a very cloudy aspect, rose
and suffered him to conduct her towards me. Scarcely relaxing her pretty
features, she addressed me with a few words of very stately recognition;
introduced me to her brother, Lord Frederick de Burgh; and then turned
away. Miss Arnold claimed her acquaintance by a humble courtesy. Her
Ladyship, looking her full in the face, passed, 'and gave no sign.' I
was instantly possessed with the spirit of patronage; and though I had
before forgotten that Miss Arnold was in the room, I now gave her my
arm, and all the attention which I could spare from Lord Frederick de
Burgh.

For a man of fashion, Lord Frederick was tolerably amusing. He knew the
name, and a little of the private history, of every person in the room.
He flattered with considerable industry; and it was not difficult to
flatter him in return. He asked me to dance. I was engaged for the three
next dances; but disappointed one of my partners that I might sit with
Lord Frederick. His Lordship next proposed that I should waltz with him.
So much native feeling yet remained in me that I shrunk from making such
an exhibition, and at first positively refused; but, happening to
observe that Lady Maria was watching, with an eye of jealous
displeasure, her brother's attentions to me, I could not resist the
temptation of provoking her, by exhibiting these attentions to the whole
assembly; and therefore consented to dance the waltz.

I own that I bitterly repented this compliance when I found myself
standing with Lord Frederick alone, in the midst of the circle which was
instantly formed round us. I forgot even the possibility of the
admiration of which I had before been so secure. My knees knocked
together, and a mist swam before my eyes. But there was now no retreat,
and the dance began. My feelings of disquiet, however, did not rise to
their height till, towards the close of the dance, I met the eye of Mr
Maitland fixed on me in stern disapprobation. I have never yet met with
any person whose displeasure was so disagreeably awful as that of Mr
Maitland. At that moment it was more than I could bear. Hastily
concluding the dance, I darted through the crowd of spectators,
regardless of their praise or censure; and, faint and unhappy, I sunk
upon a seat.

I was instantly surrounded by persons who offered me every sort of
assistance and refreshment. Lord Frederick was particularly assiduous.
But I owed the recovery of my spirits chiefly to the sarcastic smile
with which I was eyed by Lady Maria de Burgh, whom I overheard say, with
a scornful glance at the gentlemen who crowded round me, 'Really the
trick takes admirably!' Mr Maitland now making his way towards me, said
very coldly, 'Miss Percy, if you are inclined to go home, I shall attend
you.' I was provoked at his unconcern for an uneasiness of which he had
been the chief cause; and carelessly answering that I should not go home
for an hour or two, accepted Lord Frederick's arm, and sauntered round
the room.

During the rest of the evening, I paid no further attention to my
father's friend. Once or twice I thought of him, and with an indistinct
feeling of self-reproach; but I was occupied with the assiduities of my
new admirer, and had no leisure to consider of propriety. I saw, too, or
fancied that I saw, Lady Maria make some attempts to detach her brother
from me, and I had therefore double enjoyment in detaining him by my
side. Though she affected indifference, I could easily see that she
continued to watch us; and as often as I perceived her eye turned
towards us, I laughed, flirted, and redoubled the demonstrations of our
mutual good understanding. About five in the morning the party
separated; and I, more worn out by the affectation, than exhilarated by
the reality of merriment, returned home. Lord Frederick attended me to
my carriage; and Mr Maitland having handed in Miss Arnold, bowed without
speaking, and retired.

Some very excellent and judicious persons maintain a custom of calling
to mind every night the transactions of the day; but even if the habit
of self-examination had at all entered into my system, this was
manifestly no season for its exercise. Completely exhausted, I dropped
asleep even while my poor weary maid was undressing me; and closed a day
of folly, pride, and enmity, without one serious, one repentant thought.

But why do I particularise one day? My whole course of life was aptly
described in a short dialogue with Mr Maitland. 'Miss Percy,' said he,
'I hope you are not the worse for the fatigues of last night.'--'Not in
the least, sir.'--'Well, then, are you any thing the better for them? Do
you look back on your amusement with pleasure?'--'No, I must confess, I
do not. Besides, I have not leisure to look back, I am so busily looking
forward to this evening's opera.'

Mr Maitland, sighing from the very bottom of his heart, gave me a look
which said, as intelligibly as a look could speak, 'Unfortunate,
misguided girl!' We were alone; and I was half inclined to bid him give
utterance to his sentiments, and tell me all the follies which, in his
secret soul, he ascribed to me. Pride was struggling with my respect for
his opinion, when Lord Frederick de Burgh was admitted; and the voice of
candour, and of common sense, was never again allowed to mingle discord
with the sounds of the 'harp and the viol.'

I had entered the throng who were in chase of pleasure, and I was not
formed for a languid pursuit. It became the employment of every day, of
every hour. My mornings were spent at auctions, exhibitions, and
milliners' shops; my evenings wherever fashionable folly held her court.
Miss Mortimer attempted gently to stem the torrent. She endeavoured to
remove my temptation to seek amusement abroad, by providing it for me at
home; but I had drunk of the inebriating cup, and the temperate draught
was become tasteless to me. She tried to convince my reason; but reason
was in a deep sleep, and stirred no further than to repulse the hand
which would have roused. She attempted to persuade me; and I, to escape
the subject, told her, that when I had fulfilled the engagements which
were to occupy every moment of my time for the six succeeding weeks, I
would, on some rainy Sunday, stay at home all day, and patiently swallow
my whole dose of lecture at a sitting. I look back with astonishment
upon her patient endurance of my impertinences. But she saw my follies
with the pity of a superior nature; aware, indeed, of the tremendous
difference between her state and mine, yet remembering who it was that
had 'made her to differ.'

Finding her own efforts fruitless, she endeavoured to obtain my father's
interposition. But my father considered all human kind as divided into
two classes, those who were to labour for riches, and those who were to
enjoy them; and he saw no reason for restricting me in the use of any
pleasure for which I could afford to pay. Besides, he secretly regarded
with some contempt the confined notions of Miss Mortimer, and was not
without his share of elation in the triumphs which I won. He delighted
to read, in the Morning Chronicle, that at Lady G----'s ball, the
brilliancy of Miss Percy's jewels had never been surpassed, save by the
eyes of the lovely wearer. He chuckled over the paragraph which
announced my approaching nuptials with the young Duke of ----, although
he, at the same time, declared with an oath, that 'he would take care
how he gave his daughter and his money to a fellow who might be ashamed
of his father-in-law.' Indeed he took great pleasure in bringing my
suitors, especially those of noble birth, to the point of explicit
proposal, and then overwhelming them with a tremendous preponderance of
settlement. He rejected, in this way, some unexceptionable offers; for
my splendid prospects outweighed all my folly and extravagance. I left
these matters entirely to his arrangement, for I had neither wish nor
love that did not centre in amusement. I sometimes wondered, however,
what were his intentions in regard of me, and more than half suspected
that they pointed towards Mr Maitland; but I never recollected Mr
Maitland's manner towards me, without laughing at the absurdity of such
a scheme.

In the mean time, along with a few sober suitors, I attracted danglers
innumerable; for I was the fashion; admired by fashionable men; envied
by fashionable women; and, of course, raved of by their humbler mimics
of both sexes. Each had his passing hour of influence, but the lord of
the ascendant was Lord Frederick de Burgh. He was handsome, showy,
extravagant, and even more the fashion than myself. He danced well,
drove four-in-hand, and was a very Oedipus in expounding anagrams and
conundrums. Yet it was not to these advantages alone that he owed my
preference. These might have won for him the smiles which he shared with
fifty others; but he was indebted for my peculiar grace to his
relationship with Lady Maria.

The mutual dislike of this lady and myself had been confirmed by seven
years interchange of impertinences; nor was it in the least degree
mitigated by the new circumstances in which we were placed. The leader
of fashion, for the winter, was nearly related to the De Burgh family,
and she had perhaps a stronger connection with me--she owed my father
12,000_l._ Thus she naturally became the chaperon, both to Lady Maria
and myself; and we often met in circles where a person of my rank is
usually considered as an intruder. Lady Maria, proud of an ancient
family, resented this intrusion, the more, perhaps, because I trespassed
upon rights, still dearer than the privileges of rank. I, too proud
myself to tolerate pride in another, lost no opportunity of retort; and
my ingenuity in discovering these occasions was probably heightened by
the necessity of improving them with due regard to the rules of
politeness. Our mutual acquaintance, accustomed to witness genteel
indications of hatred, soon learnt to please, by gentle sarcasms against
an absent rival; and we were never without some good-natured friend, who
could hint to each whatever debt she owed to the malice of the other. I
know not how Lady Maria might feel; but I was alternately pleased with
these sacrifices to my malevolence, and mortified by perceiving, that it
was visible to every common observer. I attempted to conceal what I was
ashamed to avow; but the arrogance and irascibility, still more than the
natural openness of my temper, unfitted me for caution; and between the
fear of exposing my rancour, and my eagerness to give it vent,--between
my quick sensibility to civil scorn, and my impatience to repay it in
kind,--I endured more pain than it would have cost me to banish from my
breast every vindictive thought.

How does one disorderly passion place us at the mercy of every creature
who will use it as a tool to serve his purpose! Even my maid endeavoured
to make her peace after the destruction of a favourite cap, by telling
me that she had quitted Lady Maria's service for mine, because she had
no pleasure in dressing her last lady, who, she said, 'was little bigger
than a doll, and not much wiser.' Miss Arnold, who, in spite of her
obsequious endeavours to please, had one day the misfortune to offend
her capricious patroness, was restored to immediate favour, by
informing me, that 'the whole town believed Lady Maria's pretended cold
to be nothing but a fit of vexation, because her father had permitted
Lord Frederick to pay his addresses to me.'

In spite of the belief of the 'whole town,' however, Lord Frederick was
still nothing more than a dangler; nor had I the slightest desire to
attract his more particular regards. I was even afraid that he should,
by a serious proposal, oblige me to dispense with his future attentions,
and thereby deprive me of the amusement of witnessing the frowns, and
tosses, and fidgetings, with which Lady Maria watched a flirtation
always redoubled when she was near.

This amusement, indeed, was obtained at the expense of incurring some
animadversion. My competitors for fashion, and of course for the notice
of fashionable men, revenged themselves for my superior success by
sarcastic comments upon my supposed conquest; each obliquely
insinuating, that she might have transferred it to herself, if she could
have descended to such means as I employed. These innuendos, however,
were softened ere they reached my ear, into gentle raillery,--friendly
questions, as to the time when I was to bless Lord Frederick with my
hand,--and tender-hearted expostulations on the cruelty of delay. Miss
G---- would speak to me in the most compassionate terms, of the envy
which my conquest excited in her poor friend Miss L----; and Miss L----,
in her turn, would implore me to marry Lord Frederick, were it only to
put poor Miss G---- out of suspense. That which should have alarmed my
caution, only flattered my vanity. Instead of discountenancing the
attacks of my acquaintance by calm and steady opposition, I invited them
by feeble defence; or at best, parried them with a playfulness which
authorised their repetition.




CHAPTER V

    _Here eloquence herself might plead in vain,
    Nor one of all the heartless crowd could gain.
    And thou! O sweeter than the muse's song,
    Affection's voice divine! with cold disdain,
    Even thou art heard; while mid th' insulting throng
    Thy daunted shivering form moves timidly along._

                                             Mrs Tighe.


Marriage is like sin; if we often allow it to be presented to our view,
we learn to look without starting. I was supremely indifferent towards
Lord Frederick, and never entertained one serious thought of becoming
his wife; but I suffered myself to be rallied upon our future
connection, till the idea excited no distinct sentiment of
disapprobation; and till by degrees I forgot to make up for the
faintness of my denials, by the strength of my inward resolutions
against the match. Perhaps I should describe my case more correctly,
were I to own that I formed no plan for the future; all my serious
consideration being reserved for the comparative merits of satin and
velvet, or of an assembly and an opera. The reputation of Lord
Frederick's attentions gave me much more pleasure than the attentions
themselves; and my companions knew how to flatter me, by reminding me of
his assiduities.

Of all my remembrancers, the most persevering, if not the most vehement,
was Miss Arnold. She had made her calculations on the increased
importance which rank might give her patroness; and, with her accustomed
shrewdness, chose the means most effectual for promoting her object. She
did not, indeed, like others of my acquaintance, rally me upon marriage;
on the contrary, she rather affected some delicacy upon that subject;
but, in Lord Frederick's absence, she made him her constant theme; and
the moment he approached, she resigned to him her place by my side. As
she had intimate access to my mind, she knew how to accommodate her
attacks to my prevailing sentiments. At first, she confined herself to
chronicling the symptoms of Lady Maria's jealousy and spite; amusing me
with pictures, half mimic, half descriptive, of the ill-concealed malice
of my foe, and instigating me to further irritation. Next, she began to
mingle her register with hints of having observed, that the sport was
becoming a serious one to Lord Frederick. I was at first little inclined
to credit a circumstance which would have added to the impropriety of my
favourite amusement; but when at last Miss Arnold's instances, and my
own exuberant vanity, convinced me of the fact, some remains of justice
and humanity prompted me to a change of conduct.

'If Lord Frederick has really taken it into his wise head to be in love
with me,' said I to her one day when we were alone, 'I believe, Juliet,
I ought to carry the jest no farther.'

I spoke with great gravity, for I was half afraid that she must be of my
opinion. She looked steadily in my face, as if to see whether I were in
earnest; and then burst into a hearty fit of laughter.--'Ridiculous!'
cried she: 'what! you expect him to die of it, do you? Really, my dear,
I did not think you had been so romantic.'

I believe I blushed for appearing to over-rate a passion which my
companion considered as so frivolous; and answered carelessly, 'Oh! I
dare say he'll survive it; but one would not wilfully give uneasiness,
however trivial, you know.'

'Bagatelle! you, who make a hundred hearts ache every day, to trouble
your conscience about one stray thing! Besides, I'll answer for it, that
the affair upon the whole will give him more pleasure than pain. How
many sighs, such as lordlings breathe, would it require to repay Lord
Frederick for that air of yours, as you turned to him last night from
young Lord Glendower!'

'Ah! but that pleasure was a free gift, Juliet. I have no right to make
him pay for it; besides, Glendower is such a fool, that it was really a
relief to get rid of him. But, to be serious, I believe I shall effect
my retreat with the better grace, the sooner I begin it.'

Miss Arnold was silent for a few moments, apparently pondering the
matter; then, with an air of mature reflection, said, 'Well! perhaps,
upon the whole, you may be right. Your indifference will probably cure
Lord Frederick; besides, it will be a double charity,--it will be such a
relief to Lady Maria, poor girl! I confess, Ellen, I am often sorry for
her. Did you observe what a passion she was in last night when Lord
Frederick would not quit you to dance with Lady Augusta Loftus?'

'It was provoking to see one's brother show so little taste,' answered
I, pulling myself up, and trying to suppress a simper. 'I should have
thought I had no chance with Lady Augusta.'

'Not, indeed,' returned Miss Arnold, with a contemptuous smile, 'if
every one judged like Lady Maria de Burgh; and estimated a woman, like a
carrot, by the length of root she had under ground! Oh! what a passion
she will be in when Lord Frederick makes his proposals, and is refused!'

'But if I go much farther, Juliet, how can I refuse him? I can't tell
the man that I have been drawing him on merely for the purpose of
teasing his sister.'

'Well,' returned Miss Arnold, 'after all, I believe you are right; so
just do as you please. Your father, to be sure, might easily manage that
matter,--but do as you please.'

She knew that she might safely intrust me with this permission; secure
that, even if my resolutions were good, they would be ineffective. To
shake off the attentions of a man who has once been encouraged, requires
more firmness than usually falls to the lot of woman. Besides, Lord
Frederick had habit in his favour; and, with those who are neither
guided by reason nor principle, habit is omnipotent. Pride, too, refused
to resign the only means of repaying Lady Maria's scorn; and, in spite
of the momentary checks of conscience, the flirtation proceeded just as
before.

While my soi-disant friend encouraged my follies, no Mentor was at hand
to repress them. My father, mingling little in the circles which I
frequented, was ignorant of the encouragement which I gave to Lord
Frederick. Miss Mortimer, ill calculated to arrest the notice of the gay
and the giddy, was almost excluded from the endless invitations which
were addressed to me. The public amusements, which consumed so much of
my time, were unsuitable to her habits, to her principles, and to the
delicacy of her health. Thus she was seldom the witness of my
indiscretions. There is, indeed, no want of people who serve all
scandalous tales as the monasteries were wont to do poor strangers,
dress them out a little, and help them on their way. But these
charitable persons care not to consign a calumny to those who will
neither welcome nor advance it; and Miss Mortimer's declared aversion to
scandal kept her ignorant of some of the real, and much of the fabulous
history of her acquaintance. Accordingly, my intimacy with Lord
Frederick had, for almost three months, excited the smiles, the envy, or
the censure of 'every body one knows,' when Miss Mortimer was surprised
into hearing a copious account of my imprudence from a lady, who
declared 'that she was quite concerned to see that lovely girl, Miss
Percy, give so much occasion for censorious tales!' Who could doubt the
kindness of that concern which led her to detail my errors to my friend,
while she delicately forbore from hinting them to myself! My entrance
happening to interrupt her narrative, I heard her say, with great
emphasis,--'So very ridiculous, that I thought it an act of
friendship----' But, seeing me, she stopped; frowned very significantly
at Miss Mortimer; and then, resuming her complacency of countenance, she
accosted me in the most affectionate manner, protesting that she
rejoiced in being so fortunate as to meet with me. 'I was just telling
Miss Mortimer,' said she, 'that I never saw you look so lovely as when
you were delighting us all with that divine concerto upon the harp last
night.' In the same style she ran on for about three minutes; then
declaring, that she always forgot how time went when she was visiting
us, she hurried away; first, however, repeating her frown to Miss
Mortimer, accompanied with a cautioning shake of the head.

I turned towards my real friend, and observed that she was looking on me
through rising tears. We were alone, and I think I was always less
indocile, less unamiable, when there were few witnesses of my behaviour.
Touched with the affectionate concern that was painted in her face,
before I knew what I was doing, I had locked her hand in mine, and had
enquired 'what was the matter with my good friend?'

'My dearest Ellen,' returned she, and her mild eyes filled again, 'would
you but allow me to be your friend! But I will not talk to you now. That
prating woman has discomposed me.'

My conscience at that moment giving warning of a lecture in embryo, I
instantly recollected myself. 'Oh!' cried I, 'how can you mind what she
says? She is so prodigal of her talk, that her own stores are nothing to
her. She must depend upon the public for supply, and you know what the
proverb says of "begging and choosing." But I must be gone; I promised
to meet Lady Waller at the exhibition. Good-by.'

My reader, especially if he be a male reader, will more easily conceive
than I can express, the abhorrence of rebuke which, at this period of my
life, was strong upon me. I believe I could with more patience have
endured a fit of cramp, than the most gentle reproof that ever
friendship administered. By Miss Arnold's help, I for some days escaped
the admonitions of Miss Mortimer, till I was unfortunately placed at her
mercy, by an indisposition which I caught in striving, for two hours, to
make my way through the Duchess of ----'s lobby on the night of a rout.
The first day of my illness, Miss Arnold was pretty constantly at my
bed-side. The second, she was obliged to dine abroad, and could not
return before two o'clock in the morning. The third, while she was gone
to the auction to buy some toy which I had intended purchasing, I
received permission to leave my chamber; and Miss Mortimer, who had
scarcely quitted me by day or night, attended me to my dressing-room.

From mere habit, I approached my glass; but three days of illness had
destroyed its power to please. 'Bless me,' cried I, 'what shall I do? I
am not fit to be seen! And I am dying to see somebody or other. Do,
Grant, tell them to let in Mr Maitland, if he calls. It is ten to one
that he will not observe what a haggard wretch I look.'

'I have heard,' said Miss Mortimer, 'that love-lorn damsels sigh for
solitude. I hope your inclination for company is a sign that your heart
is still safe, in spite of reports to the contrary.' She forced a smile,
yet looked in my face with such sad earnestness, as if she had wished,
but feared to read my soul.

There is no escape now, thought I, so I must make the best of it. 'Quite
safe,' answered I; 'so safe that I scarcely know whether I have one. I
rather imagine, that in me, as in certain heroines whom I have read of
at school, a deficiency has been made on one side, on purpose that I
might wound with greater dexterity and success.'

'I rejoice to hear you say so,' returned Miss Mortimer, 'and still more
to see by that candid countenance, that you are not deceiving yourself.
I knew that you were above deceiving me.'

'Nay,' said I, 'I won't answer for that, if I had any thing serious to
conceal; but there is no cause for deceit. I would not give my dear Fido
here for all other animals of his sex upon earth, except my father
and----'

'And whom?' asked Miss Mortimer.

'I was going to say Mr Maitland,' answered I, 'because he is so good a
man; but Fido is a hundred times more affectionate and amusing.'

Miss Mortimer now smiled without trying it. 'Mr Maitland is, indeed, a
good man,' said she; 'and if you would show him half the kindness and
attention that you do to Fido----'

She too, left the sentence unfinished. Now, though I had not, I believe,
a thought of finding a lover in Mr Maitland, I often recollected, not
without pique, Miss Mortimer's first decision on that subject; and, with
a vague idea that she was going to recant, I said, with some quickness,
'Well, what would happen if I did?'

'You would find him quite as amusing,' answered she.

'Is that all?' said I, poutingly; 'then I may as well amuse myself with
Lord Frederick, who does not give me the trouble of drawing him out.'

In my momentary pet I had started the very subject which I wished to
avoid. Miss Mortimer instantly took advantage of my inadvertence. 'A
little more caution,' said she, gravely, 'may be necessary in the one
case than in the other; for Mr Maitland, far from wilfully misleading
you, would guard the delicacy of your good name with a father's
jealousy.'

'In what respect does Lord Frederick mislead me?'

'Nay, I will not assert that he does; but, my dear Ellen, our
grandmothers used to warn us against the arts of men. They represented
lovers as insidious spoilers, subtle to contrive, and forward to seize
every occasion of advantage. I fear the nature of the pursuer remains
the same, though the pursuit be transferred from our persons to our
fortunes.'

'Gorgons, and hydras, and chimeras dire!' exclaimed I; 'what a train you
have conjured up! But I can assure you, Lord Frederick is no insidious
spoiler, nor subtle, nor very bold; but a good-natured, giddy-brained
fellow, no more a match for me in cunning than I am for him at the
small-sword.'

'Take care, Ellen. We all over-rate ourselves where we are deficient. No
part of your character is more striking than your perfect singleness of
heart.'

'But what need is there of so much caution. I may as well marry Lord
Frederick as any body else. He wants fortune, I want rank. The bargain
would be very equitable. What objection could there be to it?'

'None,' replied Miss Mortimer, with a deep sigh, 'provided that your
father were satisfied; and, which is, if possible, of still more
importance, provided you are sure that Lord Frederick is the man whom
your sober judgment would approve.'

'What! would you have me marry on mere sober judgment?'

'No, I would not go quite so far; but, at least, I would not have you
marry against your sober judgment. Much, very much, will depend upon the
character of your husband. Toys cannot always please you, Ellen; for you
have warm affections. These affections may meet with neglect, perhaps
with unkindness; and have your habits fitted you for patient endurance?
You have strong feelings; and have you learnt the blessed art of
weakening their power upon your own mind, by diverting them into less
selfish channels?'

She spoke with such warmth as flushed her cheek with almost youthful
bloom; while I smiled at the solemnity with which she treated a subject
so far from serious; and inwardly pitied that ignorance of the world,
which could so much mistake the nature of a harmless flirtation. 'Oh!'
cried I, 'if I were to marry Lord Frederick, I should support his
neglect with great philosophy; and as for unkindness, we could provide
against that in the settlements.'

Miss Mortimer's manner grew still more solemn. 'Answer me as gaily as
you will,' said she, 'but, by all that you value, my dearest child, I
adjure you to be serious with yourself. You have told me that you mean
one day to change your plan of life,--to put away childish things,--to
begin your education for eternity. Is Lord Frederick well fitted to be
your companion,--your assistant in this mighty work?'

This view of the subject was far too awful for sport, far too just for
raillery, and far too grave for my taste; so I hastened to dismiss the
theme. 'Well, well, my good Miss Mortimer,' said I, 'be under no
apprehensions; I have not the slightest intention of marrying Lord
Frederick.'

'If that be the case,' returned she, 'suffer me to ask why you encourage
his attentions.'

'Merely for the sake of a little amusement,' answered I.

'Ah, Ellen!' said Miss Mortimer, 'how many young women are lured on by
the same bait, till they have no honourable means of escape; and marry
without even inclination to excuse their folly or mitigate its effects!
Let the warning voice of experience----'

The warning voice was, at that moment, silenced by the entrance of Miss
Arnold. 'Here, Ellen,' said she, 'is a packet for you, which I found in
the lobby.--What have you got there?' continued she, as I opened it.

'A note from Lord Frederick, and two tickets to Lady St Edmunds' masked
ball.'

'Delightful! When is it to be?'

'On Monday, the fifth of May.'

'Oh, we have no engagement; that is charming!'

Miss Arnold skipped about, and seemed quite in ecstasies. Miss Mortimer,
on the contrary, looked gravely intent upon her work. Her gravity, and
the extravagance of Juliet's raptures, alike restrained my pleasure; and
I only expressed it by saying, with tolerable composure, that of all
amusements, a masked ball was the one which I most desired to see.

'Oh! it will be enchanting!' cried Miss Arnold. 'What dresses shall we
wear, Ellen?'

Miss Mortimer having cut a cap, which she had been shaping, into more
than fifty shreds, now leant earnestly towards me; and, timid and
faltering, as if she feared my answer, asked, 'if I would accept of Lord
Frederick's tickets?'

'To be sure she will,' said Miss Arnold, answering for me.

'Why should I not?' said I.

'I hope you will at least consider the matter,' returned Miss Mortimer,
still addressing herself particularly to me. 'This sort of amusement is
regarded with suspicion by all sober-minded persons; and I own I could
wish that Miss Percy thought this a sufficient reason for refusing it
her countenance.'

'I am sure that is a nonsensical prejudice,' cried Miss Arnold. 'At a
subscription masquerade, indeed, one might meet with low people, but at
Lady St Edmunds' there will be none but the best company in town.'

'The best _born_ company, I suppose you mean,' answered Miss Mortimer;
'but I imagine, that the very use of masks is to banish the privileges
and the restraints of personal respectability.'

'Nay now, my dear Miss Mortimer!' cried I, playfully laying my hand upon
her mouth, 'pray don't throw away that nice lecture; you know I never
was at a masquerade in my life, and you would not be so savage as to
prose me out of going to one! only one!'

'If I thought there were any chance of success,' said Miss Mortimer,
smiling affectionately on me, 'I would make captives of these little
hands till I tried all my rhetoric.'

'It would be all lost,' cried I, 'for positively I must and will go.'
Miss Mortimer's countenance fell; for she knew that in spite of the
sportiveness of my manner, I was inaccessible to conviction; she
clearly perceived, though I was unconscious of the association, that my
pride connected an idea of rebellious presumption with whatever thwarted
my inclination; and she saw that no argument was likely to find
admission, where, instead of being welcomed as an honest counsellor, it
was guarded against as an insolent mutineer.

After a short silence, she changed her point of attack. 'If,' said she,
'your acceptance of Lord Frederick's tickets implies any obligation to
accept his particular attendance, I think, Ellen, you will see the
prudence of refusing them.'

Recollecting our late conversation, I felt myself embarrassed, and knew
not what to answer. But my companion quickly relieved my dilemma.
'Indeed, Miss Mortimer,' said she, 'you know nothing of these matters.
Ellen cannot invite gentlemen to Lady St Edmunds' house, so it is clear
that we must allow Lord Frederick to go with us; but when we are there,
we shall soon find attendants enough.'

'Yes,' said I, willing to satisfy Miss Mortimer; 'and when we get into
the rooms, we shall be under the Countess's protection, and may shake
off the gentlemen as soon as we choose.'

Miss Mortimer looked more and more anxious. 'What protection can Lady St
Edmunds afford you,' said she, 'where hundreds around her have equal
claims; and left in such a place without any guard but your own
discretion?--dearest Ellen, I beseech you, return these tickets.'

Though I was far from owning to myself that Miss Mortimer was in the
right, I could not entirely suppress the consciousness that my
resistance was wrong. The consequence was, that I grew angry with her
for making me displeased with myself, and peevishly answered, that I
would not return the tickets, nor be debarred from a harmless amusement
by any body's unfounded prejudices.

'Call them prejudices, or what you will, Ellen,' said Miss Mortimer, in
a voice which I must have been a savage to resist, 'only yield to them!'

My self-condemnation, and of course my ill-humour, were increased by her
mildness; and, forgetting all her claims to my respect, all her patient
affection, all her saint-like forbearance, I turned upon her with the
petulance of a spoiled child, and asked, 'who gave her a right to thwart
and importune me?' Tears rushed to her meek eyes. 'It was your mother!
Ellen,' cried she; 'when she bade me, in remembrance of our long and
faithful friendship, to watch and advise, and restrain her child. Will
you not give me up a few short hours of pleasure for her sake?'

I was overpowered and burst into tears; yet tears, I must own, as much
of spleen as of tenderness. Such as they were, I was ashamed of them;
and dashing them away, snatched the tickets and enclosed them in a short
note of apology to Lord Frederick. 'Are you going to return them?' cried
Miss Arnold, looking over my shoulder at what I had written, and
speaking in a tone of the utmost surprise. 'Certainly!' said I, in a
manner so decided, that without the least attempt to oppose my design,
she sat down opposite to me, as if taking wistfully her last look of the
tickets.

'Pull the bell, Juliet,' said I, somewhat triumphantly, as I sealed the
note.

'Give me the note,' said Miss Arnold, 'I am going down stairs, and will
give it to a servant. It is a pity the poor creatures should have
unnecessary trouble.' She took the packet, and quitted the room.

Miss Mortimer, the big drops still trickling down her cheek, pressed my
hand, as if she would have thanked me, had her voice been at her
command. Conscious of having made a proper sacrifice, I involuntarily
recovered my good humour; but my pride refused to let my kind friend
think her victory complete; and, releasing my hand, I turned away with
cold stateliness.

But what am I doing? Is the world peopled with Miss Mortimers, that I
should expect its forbearance for such a character as mine?--No; but I
will endure the shame which I have merited. Detest me, reader. I was
worthy of your detestation! Throw aside, if you will, my story in
disgust. Yet remember, that indignation against vice is not of itself
virtue. Your abhorrence of pride and ingratitude is no farther genuine,
than, as it operates against your own pride, your own ingratitude.




CHAPTER VI

    _Yet still thy good and amiable gifts
    The sober dignity of virtue wear not._

                                             Joanna Baillie.


As soon as Miss Arnold and I were alone, she renewed the subject of the
masked ball. 'Well, Ellen!' cried she, 'I protest, I never was so much
astonished as at your simplicity in returning those tickets. That old
woman really winds you about just as she pleases.'

'No, I am not quite so pliant,' answered I, somewhat piqued; 'but after
the footing upon which Miss Mortimer put her request, I do not see how I
could refuse it.'

'She has art enough to know where you are most accessible,' said Miss
Arnold, well knowing that nothing was more likely to stir the proud
spirit than a suspicion of being duped. 'It is really provoking to see
you so managed!' continued she; 'and now to have her trick us out of
this ball, where we should have been so happy! You would have looked
quite enchanting as a sultana! and your diamond plume would have been
divine in the front of your turban, and----'

She ran on describing our dresses and characters, enlarging on the
amusement of which my ill-timed facility had deprived us, till I was
thoroughly indignant at Miss Mortimer's interference. 'I am sure,'
interrupted I, 'I wish I had not allowed myself to be wheedled over like
a great baby; but I promise you that she shan't find it so easy to
persuade me another time.' Then I proceeded to reproach my own want of
spirit; for we can all attack ourselves where we are invulnerable. 'If I
had not been the tamest creature in the world,' said I, 'I should not
have yielded the matter; but it is in vain to talk of it now.'

'Why in vain?' cried Miss Arnold with vivacity.

'You know,' answered I, 'that now when we have returned the tickets
nothing more can be done.'

'What if we could still have the tickets?' said Miss Arnold.

'Impossible!' said I; 'I would not condescend to ask them again from
Lord Frederick.'

'But,' said Miss Arnold, throwing her arm round my neck with an
insinuating smile, 'what if I, seeing that my dearest Ellen's heart was
set upon this ball, and guessing that she would soon repent of her
saint-errantry, had slily put the tickets into my pocket, and could
produce them thus' (showing me a corner of them), 'at this very moment?'

I was thunderstruck. In spite of eight years' intimacy, Miss Arnold had
miscalculated upon my sentiments, when she expected me to approve of
this manoeuvre. Confidence in my mother's mildness and affection had
instilled into my infant mind habits of sincerity; habits which she had
strengthened less by precept than by encouragement and example. The tint
had been infused at the fountain head, and it still coloured the stream.
A dead silence followed Miss Arnold's discovery; she, waiting to hear my
sentiments, I not caring to speak them; she looking intently in my face,
I gazing steadfastly on the tickets, without recollecting that I held
them in my hand.

'How could we produce them to Miss Mortimer?' said I, at last, pursuing
my reflections aloud. 'She confidently believes that they are gone; and
she will think this such a piece of--' cunning, I would have said, but I
could not utter the ungracious truth to the kind creature, who had erred
purely to oblige me. 'She would be so astonished!' continued I: 'and
only this morning she praised my ingenuousness! I cannot keep these
tickets.'

'Oh!' cried Miss Arnold, 'I am sure there is no disingenuousness on your
part. It was not you who detained the tickets. I will tell her honestly
how the matter stands. I would be chidden for a month rather than that
you should lose this ball,--you would be so happy, and so much admired!'

'My dear, kind-hearted Juliet! you cannot suppose that I will take
advantage of your good nature! You would not have me buy my pleasure at
the expense of injuring you in any one's good opinion? No, no; were I to
keep these tickets it should be at my own hazard.'

I think Miss Arnold blushed; and she certainly hesitated a moment before
she replied,--'I assure you I do not care a straw for her good opinion.
What signify the whims of people who think like nobody else?'

Of all my acquaintance, Mr Maitland alone joined Miss Mortimer in
'thinking like nobody else;' and a recollection of him glanced across my
mind. The association was not over favourable to Miss Arnold's purpose.
'Some of the most sensible men in the kingdom think like Miss Mortimer,'
said I.

'The most sensible men in the kingdom often think wrong,' returned Miss
Arnold. 'Besides, what signify their thoughts, so long as they dare not
tell us them?'

'Some of them do dare,' said I with a sigh.

'Come, come, Ellen,' said Juliet, 'do you keep the tickets, and I shall
willingly take the blame. Be satisfied with being afraid of the men and
the methodists yourself; you will never make me so.'

'Afraid!' The word jarred upon my spirit. 'Afraid!' repeated I; 'I fear
no mortal! but I scorn to do what the coldest, most correct man in
England could think dishonourable. I would not be despised for all the
pleasures under heaven! I will send back these tickets this moment.'

I turned proudly away, wholly unconscious how much the sense of honour
was indebted to the opportune remembrance of Mr Maitland, and as
confident in my own integrity as if it had already been seven times
tried in the furnace. I rang the bell; delivered, with my own hand, the
tickets to a servant; and never in my life felt more conscious of my
advantages of stature. I forgot the languor of indisposition. I walked
with the springing step of exultation. I forgave Miss Mortimer my
disappointment. I was grateful to Juliet for her kind intentions. Every
object was pleasing, for it shone with the reflected light of
self-approbation. My evening was cheerful, though comparatively lonely;
my sleep refreshing, though unbought by exercise. I could have wished
that it had been allowable to tell Miss Mortimer all my cause of
triumph; and once (such is the selfishness of pride) I entertained a
thought of boasting to her my second sacrifice to propriety; but, when I
remembered the meanness of betraying my friend to censure, the base
suggestion vanished from my mind; and again I inwardly applauded my own
rectitude, instead of blushing that such a thought could have found
entrance into my soul.

Almost for the first time in my life I wished for Mr Maitland's
presence; probably, though I did not shape the idea to myself, in the
hope that he would confirm my self-esteem. But he came not to take
advantage of my order for excluding all visiters except himself. The
next day, however, he called; and as I was still somewhat indisposed, he
was admitted to my _boudoir_. He had not been seated many minutes, when
Miss Mortimer adverted to my late sacrifice. 'You must assist me with
your invention, Mr Maitland,' said she. 'I want to make Monday, the 5th
of May, the happiest day in the season, and as gay as is consistent with
happiness.'

'My intention is quite at your service,' said Mr Maitland; 'but why is
the 5th of May to be so distinguished?'

'I am deeply in Miss Percy's debt for amusement on that day; for it was
fixed for a masked ball, which she has given up at my request.'

I stole a glance at Mr Maitland, and saw his countenance relax
pleasantly. 'I dare say,' said he, 'you owe Miss Percy nothing on that
account, for she will have more pleasure in complying with your wish
than twenty masked balls would have given her.'

'I am not sure of that,' cried I; 'for of all things on earth, I should
like to see a masked ball.'

'Must I then, per force, allow you some merit for relinquishing this
one?' said Mr Maitland, seating himself by my side, with such a smile of
playful kindness as he sometimes bestowed on Miss Mortimer. 'But why,'
continued he, 'should you, of all women, desire to appear in masquerade?
Come, confess that you believe you may conceal more charms than fall to
the lot of half your sex, and still defy competition.'

'You may more charitably suppose,' returned I, 'that I am humbly
desirous to escape comparisons.'

'Nay,' said Mr Maitland, with a smile which banished all the severity of
truth, 'that would imply too sudden a reformation. Would you have me
believe that you have conquered your besetting sin since the last time
we met?'

'How have you the boldness,' said I, smiling, 'to talk to me of
besetting sin?'

'As I would talk to a soldier of his scars,' said Mr Maitland. 'You
think it an honourable blemish.'

'This is too bad!' cried I, 'not only to call me vain, but to tell me
that I pique myself on my vanity!'

'Ay,' returned Mr Maitland, dryly, 'on your vanity, or your pride, or
your----, call it what you will.'

'Well, pride let it be,' said I. 'Surely there is a becoming pride,
which every woman ought to have.'

'A becoming pride!' repeated Mr Maitland; 'the phrase sounds well; now
tell me what it means.'

'It means--it means--that is, I believe it means--that sort of dignity
which keeps your saucy sex from presuming too far.'

'What connection is there, think you, between cautious decency,--that
peculiar endearing instinct of a woman,--and inordinate
self-estimation?'

'Oh! I would not have my pride inordinate. I would merely have a
comfortable respect for myself and my endowments, to keep up my spirit,
that I might not be a poor domestic animal to run about tame with the
chickens, and cower with them into a corner as oft as lordly man
presented his majestic port before me!--No! I hope I shall never lose my
spirit. What should I be without it?'

'Far be it from me to reduce you so deplorably!' said Mr Maitland;
beginning with a smile, though, before he ceased to speak, the
seriousness of strong interest stole over his countenance. 'But what if
Miss Percy, intrusted with every gift of nature and of fortune, should
remember that still they were only trusts, and should fear to abuse
them? What if, like a wise steward, instead of valuing herself upon the
extent of her charge, she should study how to render the best account of
it? What would you then be? All that your warmest friends could wish
you. You would cease to covet--perhaps to receive--the adulation of
fools; and gain, in exchange, the respect, the strong affection, of
those who can look beyond a set of features.'

The earnestness with which Mr Maitland spoke was so opposite to the cold
composure of his general manner; his eyes, which ever seemed to
penetrate the soul, flashed with such added brightness, that mine fell
before them, and I felt the warm crimson burn on my cheek. I believe no
other man upon earth could have quelled my humour for a moment; but I
had an habitual awe of Mr Maitland, and felt myself really relieved,
when the entrance of my father excused me from replying.

I knew, by my father's face, that he was full of an important something;
for he merely paid the customary compliment to Mr Maitland, and then
walked silently up and down the room with an air of unusual stateliness
and satisfaction. 'What has pleased you so much this morning, papa?'
enquired I.

'Pleased, Miss Percy!' returned my father, knitting his brow, and
endeavouring to look out of humour; 'I tell you I am not pleased. I am
teased out of my life on your account by one fellow or another.' Then,
turning to Maitland, he formally apologised for troubling him with
family affairs, though I believe he was, on this occasion, not at all
sorry to have his friend for a hearer.

'Which of them has been teasing you now, sir?' said I, carelessly.

'The Duke of C----,' said my father, in a fretful tone, though a smile
was lurking at the corner of his mouth, 'has been here this morning to
make proposals for a match between you and his son Frederick.'

'Well, sir,' said I, with some little interest in the issue of the
conference; but my curiosity was instantly diverted into another
channel, by a sudden and not very gentle pressure of the hand, which Mr
Maitland had still held, and which he now released. The gesture, however
inadvertent, attracted my eye towards him; but his face was averted, and
my vanity could not extract one particle of food from the careless air
with which he began to turn over the pages of a book which lay upon my
work-table.

My father proceeded. 'His Grace proposed to settle two thousand pounds
a-year upon his son; no great matter he was forced to confess; but then
he harangued about supporting the dignity of the title, and the hardship
of burdening the representative of the family with extravagant provision
for younger children. But, to balance that, Ellen, he hinted that you
might be a Duchess; for the Marquis, like most of these sprigs of
quality, is of a very weakly constitution. Pity that ancient blood
should so often lose strength in the keeping! Eh, Ellen!'

My father made a pause, and looked as if he expected that I should now
express some curiosity in regard to his decision, but my pride was
concerned to show my total indifference on the subject; so I sat quietly
adjusting my bracelet, without offering him the slightest encouragement
to proceed. He looked towards Maitland; but Maitland was reading most
intently. He turned to Miss Mortimer; and at last found a listener, who
was trembling with interest which she had not power to express.

'What think you of the great man's liberality' continued my father. 'Is
not two thousand pounds a-year a mighty splendid offer for a girl like
my Ellen there, with a hundred thousand pounds down, and perhaps twice
as much more before she dies? Eh, Miss Elizabeth? Should not I be a very
sensible fellow, to bring a jackanapes into my house to marry my
daughter, and spend my money, and be obliged to me for the very coat on
his back, and all by way of doing me a great honour forsooth? No, no.
I'll never pay for having myself and my girl looked down upon. She's a
pretty girl, and a clever girl, and the d----l a De Burgh in England can
make his daughter as well worth an honest man's having: eh, Maitland?'

'Not in your opinion and mine, undoubtedly, sir,' said Maitland, with
the air of a man who is obliged to pay a compliment.

'I told the old gentleman my mind very distinctly,' said my father,
drawing up his head, and advancing his chest. 'I have given his grandee
pride something to digest, I warrant you. And now he is ashamed of his
repulse, and wants the whole affair kept private forsooth. I am sure it
is none of my concern to trumpet the matter. All the world knows I have
refused better offers for Miss Percy.'

'If his Grace wishes the affair to be so private,' cried I, 'I am afraid
he won't inform his daughters of it.'

'You of course will consider it as quite at an end,' said my father,
addressing himself to me.

'Oh certainly, sir,' answered I; 'but how shall I get the news conveyed
to Lady Maria?'

'Tell it to a mutual friend as a profound secret,' said Mr Maitland,
dryly. 'But why are you so anxious that Lady Maria should hear of her
brother's disappointment?'

'Oh because it will provoke her so delightfully,' cried I. 'The
descendant of a hundred and fifty De Burghs to be rejected by a city
merchant's daughter! It will ruin her in laces and lip-salve.'

I was so enchanted with the prospect of my rival's vexation, that it was
some moments ere I observed that Mr Maitland, actually turning pale, had
shrunk from me as far as the end of the couch would permit him, and sat
leaning his head on his hand with an air of melancholy reflection.
Presently afterwards he was rising to take his leave, when a servant
came to inform Miss Mortimer that Mrs Wells, the woman whom Mr Maitland
had rescued from the effect of my rashness, was below waiting to speak
with her. 'Stay a few minutes, Mr Maitland, and see your protegée,' said
Miss Mortimer to him, as he was bidding her good morning. He immediately
consented; while my father quitted the room, saying, 'If the woman is
come for money, Miss Mortimer, you may let me know. I always send these
people what they want, and have done with them.'

Mrs Wells, however, was come, not in quest of money, but of a commodity
which the poor need almost as often, though they ask it less frequently.
She wanted advice. Finding that Miss Mortimer was not alone, she was at
first modestly unwilling to intrude upon the attention of the company.
But Mr Maitland, who, I believe, possessed some talisman to unlock at
his pleasure every heart but mine, engaged her by a few simple
expressions of interest to unfold the purpose of her coming. She told
us, that her eldest daughter, Sally, had for some time been courted by a
young man of decent character, and was inclined to marry him. 'The girl
must be a great fool,' thought I, 'for she can neither expect carriages
nor jewels, and what else should tempt any woman to marry?' The lover,
Mrs Wells said, could earn five-and-twenty or thirty shillings a week by
his trade, which was that of a house-carpenter. This, together with
Sally's earnings as a mantua-maker, might maintain the young couple in
tolerable comfort. But they had no house, and could not furnish one
without incurring debts which would be a severe clog on their future
industry. The young man, however, being in love, was inclined to despise
all prudential considerations; and, in spite of her mother's counsels,
had almost inspired his mistress with similar temerity. Mrs Wells
therefore begged of Miss Mortimer to fortify Sally with her advice, and
to set before her the folly of so desperate a venture. 'Thanks to your
excellent mother, Miss Percy,' said she, 'my children have forgotten
poverty; and, indeed, no one rightly knows what it is, but they who have
striven with it as I have. Any other distress one may now and then
forget; but hard creditors, and cold hungry children will not allow one
to forget them.' Her proposal was, that Miss Mortimer should prevail
with the girl to resist her lover's solicitations for a few years, till
the joint savings of the pair might amount to forty or fifty pounds,
which she said would enable them to begin the world reputably.

'Forty or fifty pounds,' cried I; 'is that all?--Oh! if you are sure
that Sally really wants to be married, I can settle that in a minute. I
am sure I must have more than that left of my quarterly allowance.'

'What are you talking of, Ellen?' cried Miss Arnold, who had just
entered the room. 'You are not going to give away fifty pounds at once?'

'Why not?' answered I. 'Probably I shall not want the money; or if I do,
papa will advance my next quarter.'

I had, I believe, at first offered my gift from a simple emotion of
good-will; but now, taught by my friend's resistance, I began to claim
some merit for my generosity; and glanced towards Mr Maitland in search
of his approving look. But Mr Maitland had no approving look to reward a
liberality which sprang from no principle, and called for no labour,
and inferred no self-denial. His eye was fixed upon me with an
expression of calm compassion, which seemed to say, 'Poor girl! have
even thy best actions no solid virtue in them?' Mrs Wells, however, had
less discrimination. The poor know not what it is to give without
generosity, for they possess nothing which can be spared without
self-denial. Tears of gratitude filled her eyes while she praised and
thanked me; but she positively refused to deprive me of such a sum. 'No,
no,' said she, 'let Robert and Sally work and save for two or three
years; and in that time they will get a habit of patience and good
management, which will be of as much use to them as money.' The
approving look which I had sought was now bestowed upon Mrs Wells. 'You
judge very wisely, Mrs Wells,' said Mr Maitland. 'But two or three years
will seem endless to them; say one year, that we may not frighten them,
and whatever they can both save in that time, I will double to them.'

Mrs Wells thanked him, not with the servility of dependence, but with
the warmth of one whom kindness had made bold. Then turning to me, and
apologising for the liberty she took, she begged my patronage for Sally
in the way of her business. 'I assure you, ma'am,' said she, 'that Sally
works very nicely; and if she could get the name of being employed by
such as you, she would soon have her hands full.'

I was thoroughly discomposed by this request. I could part with fifty
pounds with inconvenience, but to wear a gown not made by Mrs Beetham,
was a humiliation to which I could not possibly submit. Unwilling to
disappoint, I knew not what to answer; but Miss Arnold instantly
relieved my dilemma. 'Bless you, good woman,' cried she, 'how could Miss
Percy wear such things as your daughter would make? Before she could
have a pattern, it would be hacked about among half the low creatures in
town.'

Mrs Wells coloured very deeply. 'I meant no offence,' said she: 'I
thought, perhaps, Miss Percy might direct Sally how she wished her gowns
to be made, and I am sure Sally would do as she was directed.'

'Indeed, my good friend,' answered I, 'I can no more direct Sally in
making a gown, than in making a steam-engine. But I will ask employment
for her wherever I think I am likely to be successful. Come, Miss
Mortimer, I shall begin with you.'

'Do,' said Mr Maitland, in his dry manner. 'Miss Mortimer can afford to
spare the attraction of a fashionable gown.'

It has been since discovered, that Mr Maitland did, that very day,
provide for the accomplishment of his promise, in case that death or
accident should prevent his fulfilling it in person. Miss Mortimer
easily persuaded Sally to pursue the prudent course; and, besides,
exerted her influence so successfully, as to procure employment for
every hour of the girl's time. My profuse offer passed from my mind,
and was forgotten. But their charity,--the charity of Christians,--had
at all times little resemblance to the spurious quality which in my
breast usurped the name. Theirs was the animated virtue, instinct with
life divine!--mine, the mutilated stony image, which even if it had
been complete in all its parts, would still have wanted the living
principle. Theirs was the blessed beam of Heaven, active, constant,
universal!--mine the unprofitable, unsteady flash of the 'troubled sea,
which cannot rest.'




CHAPTER VII

    _'Her reputation?' That was like her wit,
    And seemed her manner and her state to fit.
    Something there was--what, none presumed to say,
    Clouds lightly passing on a smiling day;
    Whispers and hints which went from ear to ear,
    And mixed reports no judge on earth could clear._

                                             Crabbe.


Recovered from my indisposition, I resumed my gay career. But who ever
spent a week in retirement, without projecting some reform, however
partial, some small restraint upon desire, or some new caution in its
gratification? I determined to observe more circumspection in my conduct
towards Lord Frederick; though Miss Arnold laboured to convince me, that
our flirtation might now be carried on with more safety than ever, since
the parties were aware that it could have no serious issue.
_Tête-à-tête_ with her in my dressing-room, I could detect the fallacy
of her arguments, and refused to be misled by them. The most imprudent
being upon earth makes many a judicious resolution; and may trace his
errors less to the weakness of his judgment, than to the feebleness of
his self-command.

The first party which I joined after my convalescence, was at a concert
and _petit souper_ which Lady G. gave to fifty-eight of her particular
friends. As soon as I entered the room, my attention was arrested by a
group, consisting of Lady Maria de Burgh, her favourite Lady Augusta
Loftus, Lord Frederick, and Lord Glendower. Lady Augusta seemed
assiduous to entertain my admirer, who, lounging against a pillar with
his eyes half shut, appeared only to study how he might answer her with
the slightest possible exertion of mind or muscle. Perceiving me, Lady
Maria touched her friend's arm, as if to direct her eye towards me; then
whispered behind her fan somewhat which seemed immoderately entertaining
to both. A rudeness which ought to have awakened only my pity, roused my
resentment, and I piously resolved to seize an early opportunity of
retort. The party continued their merriment, and I even observed Lady
Augusta endeavouring to engage Lord Frederick to join in it. This was
too much; and I resolved to show Lady Augusta that I was no such
despicable rival. But I had been accustomed to accept, not to solicit
the attentions of Lord Frederick, and I waited till he should accost me.
Lord Frederick, however, seemed entirely insensible to my presence. His
eye did not once wander towards me; indeed the assiduity of his
companion left scarcely even his eyes at liberty. Weary of watching Lady
Augusta's advances to my quondam admirer, I at last condescended to
claim his notice by passing close to him. A distant bow was the only
courtesy which I obtained. I was asked to sing, and chose an elaborate
bravura, which Lord Frederick had often declared to be divine. In the
midst of it I saw him break from his obsequious fair one and approach
me. My heart, I own, bounded with triumph. Premature triumph, alas! He
addressed our hostess, who was bending over me; pleaded indispensable
business; and leaving the divine bravura to more disengaged hearers,
withdrew.

I was disconcerted; for, like other beauties, I liked better to repulse
presumption than to endure neglect. My song ended, I had remained for
some time sullen and silent, regardless of the lavish commendations
which were poured upon me; when, recollecting that my discomposure would
afford matter of exultation to my rivals, I suddenly rallied my spirits,
and looked round for some new instrument of offence. Lord Glendower, the
reputed suitor of Lady Maria, still kept his station by her side. I
contrived to engage him during the remainder of the evening. The penalty
of my malice was three hours' close attention to the dullest fool in
England; for vice, too, requires her self-denials, though her disciples
are not, like those of virtue, forewarned of the requisition. Languid,
disgusted and out of humour, I fatigued myself with laborious
playfulness, till the separation of the party released me from penance.

Lord Frederick's 'indispensable business' was the next day explained by
a report, that he had passed the night in a gaming-house, where he had
lost five-and-twenty thousand pounds. Miss Arnold spoke with the
tenderest compassion of this disaster, 'smoothing my ruffled plumes,'
by ascribing it to the desperation occasioned by his late
disappointment. Forgetting that she had so lately ridiculed my romantic
estimate of the force of his passion, she suddenly appeared convinced
that it was strong enough to account for the most frantic actions. Folly
itself is not so credulous as self-conceit. I more than half believed,
though I affected to disprove her assertion. It approached, indeed, to
the truth more nearly than she suspected. Money, however obtained, was
absolutely necessary to Lord Frederick; and mine being beyond his reach,
he had recourse to fortune. But, in calculating upon the actions of the
gay, the liberal Lord Frederick, the narrow motives of interest never
once entered into my account. Dazzled by the false spirit, indicated by
the magnitude of his loss, and pleased with the cause to which vanity
ascribed it, I had half pardoned his late neglect, when I that evening
met him at Mrs Clermont's rout.

So crowded were the rooms that I was not aware when he entered; and when
I first observed him, he was standing in close conversation with Miss
Arnold. Even pride can make concessions where it imagines cause of pity.
I condescended to give Lord Frederick another opportunity of renewing
his attention, and moved towards him through the crowd. My friend and he
were conversing with great earnestness; and, as I approached them from
behind, I caught the last words of their dialogue. His Lordship's speech
concluded with the expression, 'I should look confoundedly silly;'--Miss
Arnold's answer was, 'The thing is impossible:--he has not another
relation upon earth, except----' Seeing me at her side, Miss Arnold
stopped abruptly, and, I think, changed colour; but I had no time to
make observations, for Lord Frederick, seizing my hand, exclaimed, 'Ah,
you cruel creature, have you at last given me an opportunity to speak
with you. I thought you had been determined to cut me, since old
squaretoes interfered.' I carelessly answered that I had not made up my
mind on that subject:--but, had my reply been delayed a few moments, it
could not have been uttered with truth; for just then Lady Maria came to
request, with no small earnestness, that her brother would go and
exhibit to Lady Augusta Loftus a trick with cards, which it seems he
could perform with singular dexterity. 'We shall see who will prevail,'
thought I, and I seated myself as if to evince my resolution of
remaining where I was. Lord Frederick immediately excused himself to his
sister; and she at last, in evident vexation, relinquished her attempt.

This little victory raised my spirits; and I enjoyed with double relish,
and provoked with double industry, the jealous glances with which I was
watched by Lady Maria and her fair friend. Lord Frederick, on his part,
had never been so assiduous to entertain. He flattered, made love, spoke
scandal, and even threw out some sarcasms upon the jealousy of his
sister. How had enmity perverted my mind, when I could tolerate this
unnatural assassination! How had it darkened my understanding, when I
shrunk not with suspicion from the heart which was dead to the sacred
charities of kindred!

In the course of our conversation, Lord Frederick rallied me on the
subject of the masked ball, urging me to give my reasons for refusing
the tickets. Weakly ashamed to be suspected of submitting to authority,
I employed every excuse except the true one; and, among others, alleged,
that I was unacquainted with the lady by whom the ball was to be given.
Lord Frederick insisted upon introducing his relation, Lady St Edmunds,
to me; declaring that he had often heard her express a desire to be of
my acquaintance. I could not resist the temptation of this introduction,
for Lady St Edmunds was of the highest fashion. I protested, indeed,
that my resolution, with regard to the masquerade, was immutable, but I
suffered Lord Frederick to go in search of his gay relative.

He soon returned, leading a lady, in whose appearance some half-a-dozen
wrinkles alone indicated the approach of the years of discretion. Her
cheek glowed with more than youthful roses. Her eye flashed with more
than cheerful fires. Her splendid drapery loosely falling from her
shoulders, displayed the full contour of a neck whiter than virgin
innocence, pure even from the faintest of those varying hues which stain
the lilies of nature. She addressed me with much of the grace and all
the ease of fashion, loaded me with compliments and caresses, and
charmed me with the artful condescension which veils itself in
respectful courtesy. She proposed to wait upon me the next day, and
entreated that I would allow her the privilege of old acquaintance, by
giving orders that she should be admitted. I readily consented, for
indeed I was delighted with my new friend. I was dazzled with the
freedom of her language, the boldness of her sentiments, and her
apparent knowledge of the world. The partial admiration expressed for
me, by one so much my superior in years and rank, warmed a heart
accessible through every avenue of vanity; and I spent an hour in lively
chit-chat with her and Lord Frederick, without once recollecting that
her Ladyship's fame was not quite so spotless as her bosom.

Faithful to her appointment, Lady St Edmunds called upon me the next
morning; and though she looked less youthful, was as fascinating as
ever. No charm of graceful sportiveness, of artful compliment, or of
kindly seeming, was wanting to the attraction of her manners. I was
accustomed to the adulation of men; and sometimes, when it was less
dexterously applied, or when I was in a more rational humour, I could
ask myself which the obsequious gentleman admired the most,--Miss Percy,
or the pretty things they said to her. But let no one boast of being
inaccessible to flattery, till he had withstood that of a superior; and
let that superior be highly bred, seemingly disinterested, and a woman.
I did not, at the time, perceive that Lady St Edmunds flattered me; I
merely was convinced that she had a lively sensibility towards a kindred
mind, and a generosity which could bestow unenvying admiration upon
superior youth and beauty.

When she was about to retire, she mentioned her masked ball, expressing
a strong desire to see me there, and extending the request to Miss
Arnold. With one of the deepest sighs I ever breathed, I told her of my
unfeigned regret that it was out of my power to accept her invitation.
Lady St Edmunds looked as if she read my thoughts. 'I won't be denied,'
said she; 'be as late as you will; but surely you may escape from your
engagement for an hour or two at least. Come, dear Miss Percy, you would
not be so mischievous as to spoil my whole evening's pleasure; and now
that I know you, there is no thinking of pleasure without you.'

I was again on the point of declining, though with tears in my eyes,
when I was interrupted by Miss Arnold. 'I can assure your Ladyship,'
said she, 'that we have no engagement; only, our duenna does not approve
of masquerades, and Ellen happens to be in a submissive frame just now.'

I could better endure the weight of my shackles than the exhibition of
them; and, the warm blood rushing to my cheek, I answered, 'That I did
not suppose Miss Mortimer, or any other person, pretended a right to
control me; that I had merely yielded to entreaties, not submitted to
authority.'

'And why must the duenna's entreaties be more powerful than mine?' said
Lady St Edmunds, laying her white hand upon my arm, and looking in my
face with a soul-subduing smile.

'Dear Lady St Edmunds!' cried I, kissing her hand, 'do not talk of
entreaty. Lay some command upon me less agreeable to my inclination,
that I may show how eager I am to obey you. But indeed, I fear--I
think--I--after giving my promise to Miss Mortimer, I believe I ought
not to retract.'

'Why not, my dear?' said Lady St Edmunds. 'It is only changing your
mind, you know, which the whole sex does every day.'

'You know, Ellen,' said Miss Arnold, 'the case is quite altered since
you talked of it with Miss Mortimer. She did not object so much to the
masked ball, as to your going with----'

'Juliet!' said I, stopping her with a frown, for I felt shocked that she
should tell Lady St Edmunds that her nephew's attendance was objected to
by Miss Mortimer.

'Ah!' cried Lady St Edmunds, with the prettiest air of reproach
imaginable, 'I see Miss Arnold is more inclined to oblige me than you
are; so to her I commit my cause for the present, for now I positively
must tear myself away. Good-by, my pretty advocate. Be sure you make me
victorious over the duenna. Farewell, my lovely perverse one,' continued
she, kissing my cheek. 'I shall send you tickets, however. I issue only
three hundred.'

Lady St Edmunds retired, and left my heart divided between her and the
masquerade. She was scarcely gone, when Miss Mortimer came in; and, full
of my charming visiter, I instantly began to pronounce her eulogium. I
thought Miss Mortimer listened with very repulsive coldness; of course,
a little heat of a less gentle kind was added to the warmth of my
admiration, and my language became more impassioned. 'I have been told
that Lady St Edmunds is very insinuating,' said Miss Mortimer; and this
was all the answer I could obtain. My praise became more rapturous than
ever. Miss Mortimer remained silent for some moments after I had talked
myself out of breath. Perhaps she was considering how she might reply
without offence. 'Such manners,' said she, 'must indeed be engaging. I
see their effect in the eloquence of your praise. I wish it were always
safe to yield to their attraction.'

'Bless me! Miss Mortimer,' interrupted I, 'you are the most suspicious
being! I see you want me to suspect Lady St Edmunds of every thing that
is bad, and for no earthly reason but because she is delightful!'

'Indeed, my dear Ellen,' returned Miss Mortimer, 'you wrong me. I should
be the last person to taint your mind with any unfounded suspicion. But
it is natural, you know, that years should teach us caution.'

'Oh!' exclaimed I, fervently clasping my hands, 'if age must chill all
my affections, and leave me only a dead soul chained to a half-living
body, may Heaven grant that my years may be few! May I go to my grave
ere my heart cease to love and trust its fellows!'

'Dearest child!' cried Miss Mortimer, 'may many a happy year improve and
refine your affections; and may they long survive the enthusiasm which
paints their objects as faultless! But is it not better that you should
know a little of Lady St Edmunds' character, before intimacy confirm her
power over you?'

'Why should I know any thing more of her than I do? I can see that she
has the most penetrating understanding, the most affectionate heart!'

'No doubt these are great endowments; but something more may be
necessary. The proverb is not the less true for its vulgarity, which
tells us, that the world will estimate us by our associates; and, what
is still more important, the estimate will prove just. If you form
intimacies with the worthless, or even with the suspected----'

'Worthless! suspected!' exclaimed I, my blood boiling with indignation;
'who dares to use such epithets in speaking of Lady St Edmunds?'

'Be calm, Ellen. I did not, at the moment that I uttered these offensive
words, intend any personal application. If I had, my language should
have been less severe. But I can inform you, that the world has been
less cautious, and that those epithets have been very freely applied to
Lady St Edmunds!'

'Yes! perhaps by a set of waspish bigots, envious of her, who is herself
so far above the meanness of envy,--or who cannot pardon her for
refusing to make Sunday a day of penance!'

Miss Mortimer, though naturally one of the most timid creatures upon
earth, was as inflexible in regard to some particular opinions, as if
she had had the nerves of a Hercules. 'Indeed, Ellen,' said she, calmly,
'it would be ungrateful in you, or any other woman of fashion, to charge
the world with intolerance towards Sabbath-breakers. I fear that Lady St
Edmunds would give little offence by her Sunday's parties, if she were
circumspect in her more private conduct.'

'Bless my heart, Miss Mortimer!' cried I, 'what have I to do with the
private conduct of all my acquaintance? What is it to me, if Lady St
Edmunds spoil her children, or rule her husband, or lose a few hundred
pounds at cards now and then?'

Miss Mortimer smiled.--'Even bigots,' said she, 'must acquit her
Ladyship of all these faults, for she takes no concern with her
children,--she is separated from her husband,--and certainly does not
_lose_ at cards.'

'And so you, who pretend to preach charity towards all mankind, can
condescend to retail second-hand calumny! You would have me desert an
amiable, and, I am persuaded, an injured woman, merely because she has
the misfortune to be slandered!'

'When you know me better, Ellen,' said Miss Mortimer, meekly, 'you will
find, that it is not my practice to repeat any scandalous tale, without
some better reason than my belief that it is true. I shall not at
present defend the justice of the censures which have fallen upon Lady
St Edmunds. I will merely offer you my opinion, in hopes that, a few
hours hence, you may reconsider it. If a friend, whose worth you had
proved, whose affection you had secured, were made a mark for the shafts
of calumny,--far be it from you to seek a base shelter, leaving her
unshielded, to be 'hit by the archers;' but, against the formation of a
new acquaintance, the slightest suspicion ought, in my opinion, to be
decisive. The frailty of a good name is as proverbial as its value; and
virgin fame is far too precious to be ventured upon uncertainty, and far
too frail to escape uninjured even from the appearance of hazard.'

This speech was so long that it gave me time to cool, and so
incontrovertible, that I found some difficulty in replying. Before I
could summon a rejoinder, Miss Mortimer, who never pursued a victory,
had quitted the room. She had left me an unpleasant subject of
meditation; but she had allowed me to postpone the consideration of it
for a few hours; so, in the mean time, I turned my thoughts to the
masquerade.

And first, by way of safeguard against temptation, I thought it best to
lay down an immutable resolution that I would not go. It was very hard,
indeed, to be deprived of such a harmless amusement; but, as I had given
an unlucky promise, I purposed magnanimously to adhere to it, resolving,
however, to indemnify myself the next opportunity. Thus mortified, I
began to indulge my fancy in painting what _might have been_ the
pleasures of the masquerade. I imagined (there was surely no harm in
imagining!) how well I could have personated the fair Fatima,--how
happily the turban would have accorded with the Grecian turn of my
head,--how softly the transparent sleeves of my caftan would have shaded
my rounded arm,--how favourably the Turkish costume would have shown the
light limb, and the elastic step. I invented a hundred witticisms which
I might have uttered,--a hundred compliments which I might have
received. Above all, I dwelt upon the approbation, the endearments of
the charming Lady St Edmunds, till my heart bounded with the ideal joy.
When I retired to rest, the same gay visions surrounded me; and I gladly
awoke to pursue them again in my waking dreams.

How suitable to our nature is that commandment which places upon the
thoughts the first restraints of virtue! It was painful to interrupt my
delightful reverie, by renewing my resolutions of self-denial, so I
passed them over as already fixed, insensible how fatally I was
undermining their foundations. The bribe must be poor indeed, which the
aids of imagination cannot render irresistible. The longer my fancy
dwelt upon my lost pleasure, the more severe seemed my privation, the
more unfounded Miss Mortimer's prejudice. From the wish that the thing
had been right, the step was easy to the belief that it could not be
_very_ wrong. Before the morning, my inclination had so far bewildered
my judgment, that Miss Arnold found no difficulty in persuading me to
refer the matter to my father; and, regardless of my promise, to abide
by his decision.

She herself undertook the statement of the case; for it happened, I know
not how, that, even when she spoke only truth, her statements always
served a purpose better than mine. The effect of her adroit
representation was, that my father decided in favour of the masquerade;
observing that 'Miss Mortimer, though a very good woman, had some odd
notions, which it would not do for every body to adopt.'

Thus it seemed determined that I was to enjoy the amusement upon which I
had set my heart. And yet I was not satisfied. My gay visions were no
sooner likely to be realised, than they lost half their charms. A slight
scrutiny into my own mind would have enabled me to trace the cause of
this change to a consciousness of error; but a vague anticipation of the
issue was sufficient to prevent me from entering upon the enquiry. I
therefore contented myself with attempting to impose upon my own
judgment, by asserting that, since my father was satisfied, I was at
full liberty to pursue my inclination. 'To be sure,' said Miss Arnold,
'when Mr Percy has given his permission, who else has any right to
interfere?'

'And will you, my dear sir, speak of it to Miss Mortimer,' said I,
anxious to transfer that task to any one who would undertake it.

'Oh, I'll manage all that,' cried Miss Arnold. 'If Mr Percy were to
mention the matter to Miss Mortimer, it would look as if he thought
himself accountable to her; and then there would be no end of it; for
she fancies already that she should be consulted in every thing that
concerns you,--as if Mr Percy, who has so long superintended the
greatest concerns in the kingdom, could not direct his own family
without her interference!'

I believe my father, as well as myself, might have some latent
misgivings of mind, which made him not unwilling to accept of Miss
Arnold's offered services. 'I have so many important affairs to mind,'
said he, 'that I shall probably think no more of such a trifle; so I
commission you, Miss Juliet, to let Miss Mortimer know my opinion;
which, I dare say, you will do discreetly, for you seem a civil,
judicious young lady. Elizabeth, poor soul, meant all for the best;
thinking to save me a few pounds, I suppose. But you may let her know,
that what it may be very commendable in her to save is altogether below
my notice. When a man has thousands, and tens of thousands passing
through his hands every day, it gives him a liberal way of thinking. But
as for a woman, who never was mistress of a hundred pounds at a time,
what can she know of liberality?'

My father had now entered on a favourite topic, the necessary connection
between riches and munificence. Miss Arnold listened respectfully,
approving by smiles, nods, and single words of assent; while I stood
wrapt in my meditations, if I may give that name to the succession of
unsightly images which conscience forced into my mind, and which I as
quickly banished. Having triumphantly convinced an antagonist who
ventured not upon opposition, my father withdrew; and left my friend and
me to consult upon our communication to Miss Mortimer.

'She will be in a fine commotion,' said I, endeavouring to smile, 'when
she hears that we are going to this masquerade after all. But since you
have undertaken the business, Juliet, you may break it to her to-night,
while I am at the opera; and then the fracas will be partly over before
I come home.'

'I have been just thinking,' said Miss Arnold, 'all the time that your
father was making that fine oration, that it would be wiser not to break
it to her at all. Where is the necessity for her knowing any thing of
the matter? We shall have other invitations for the same evening; so we
may go somewhere else first, and afterwards look in for an hour or two
at the ball. Nobody need know that we have been there.'

'What, Juliet! would you have me steal off in that clandestine way, as
if I were afraid or ashamed to do what my father approves of? If I am to
act in defiance of Miss Mortimer, I will do it openly, and not slavishly
pilfer my right, as if I did not dare to assert it.'

'Don't be angry, Ellen,' said Miss Arnold, soothingly; 'I shall most
willingly do whatever you think best. But, for my part, I would almost
as soon give up the masquerade, as be lectured about it for the next
three weeks.'

'But, to give Miss Mortimer her due,' returned I, 'she does not lecture
much.'

'That is true,' replied Miss Arnold. 'But then she will look so
dolefully at us. I am sure I would rather be scolded heartily at once.'

In this last sentiment, I cordially sympathised; for the silent
upbraiding of the eye is the very poetry of reproach--it addresses
itself to the imagination. 'I wish,' cried I, sighing from the very
bottom of my heart, 'that I had never heard of this ball!'

'In my opinion,' said Miss Arnold, 'it would save both us and Miss
Mortimer a great deal of vexation, if she were never to hear more of
it.'

'Say no more of that, Juliet,' interrupted I; 'I am determined not to
take another step in the business without her knowledge.'

Miss Arnold was silent for a few moments; and when her voice again drew
my attention, I perceived tears in her eyes. 'Well, Ellen,' said she,
'since you are so determined, I see only one way of settling the matter
quietly. I will give my ticket to Miss Mortimer,--she can have no
objection to your going, if she be there herself to watch you.'

'Never name such a thing to me, Juliet! What! leave you moping alone,
fancying all the pleasure you might have had, while I am amusing myself
abroad. I had rather never see a mask in my life!'

'I should prefer any thing to bringing her ill-humour upon you,' said
Miss Arnold; 'and since you persist in telling her, I see no other way
of escape. I shall most cheerfully resign the masquerade to give you
pleasure.'

'My own dear Juliet!' cried I, locking my arms round her neck, while
unbidden tears filled my eyes, 'how can you talk of giving my pleasure
by sacrificing your own, when you know that more than half the delight
in my life is to share its joys with you.' Nor were these the empty
sounds of compliment, nor even the barren expression of a passing
fervour. My purse, my ornaments, my amusements, even the assiduities of
my admirers, all on which my foolish heart was most fixed, I freely
shared with her. Yet, this same Juliet--but is it for me to complain of
ingratitude?--for me, who, favoured by an all-bountiful Benefactor,
abused his gifts, despised his warnings, neglected his commands,
abhorred his intercourse! Let those who are conscious of similar demerit
cease to reproach the less flagrant baseness, which repays with evil the
feeble benefits that man bestows on man.

On the present occasion, Juliet's influence prevailed with me so far,
that, before we separated, I had agreed to a compromise. I persisted,
indeed, in refusing to go clandestinely to the masquerade, but I adhered
to my purpose of going; and pledged my word, that, in order to avoid all
importunity on the subject, I would leave Miss Mortimer in ignorance of
my determination, till the very hour of its accomplishment. Miss Arnold
undertook to keep my father silent, which she performed in the most
dexterous manner; and with the more ease, because, perhaps, he was
conscious that the subject furnished materials for confession as well as
for narrative.




CHAPTER VIII

                _--You squander freely,
    But have you wherewithal? Have you the fund
    For these outgoings? If you have, go on;
    If you have not--stop in good time, before
    You outrun honesty._

                                             Cumberland (from Diphilus).


In defiance of Miss Mortimer's advice, I returned Lady St Edmunds' visit
without delay. I made, indeed, some general enquiries into the character
of my new favourite; myself unwilling to hear, I learnt that she was
said to play games of chance with extraordinary skill and success; and
that she was suspected of impropriety in a point where detection is
still more fatal. It is unfortunate that prudence and self-sufficiency
are so rarely found together since he who will make no use of the wisdom
of others, certainly needs an extraordinary fund of his own. I was
predetermined to consider whatever could be advanced against Lady St
Edmunds, as the effect of malicious misrepresentation. My self-conceit
pointed me out as no improper person to stem the tide of unjustice; and,
by an admirable, though in this case an abused, provision in our nature,
my kindly feelings towards her were strengthened at once by my
intentions to serve her, and by my resentment of her supposed wrongs.

Lady St Edmunds, on her part, more than met my advances. She treated me
with a distinction which I ascribed solely to the most flattering
partiality; and sought my society with an eagerness in which I suspected
no aim beyond its own gratification. Even now, when experience has
taught me to look through these fair seemings, I am convinced that her
affection was not entirely feigned; for I have seldom met with a heart
so callous, as not to be touched with a transient sympathy at least, by
the honest enthusiasm of youth. In the mean time, I had the more
confidence in the disinterestedness of her regard, because I could
detect no sinister motive for her attentions. Once, and only once, she
had engaged me in play; but the stake was not large, and I rose a
winner.

Miss Mortimer nevertheless continued her opposition to the acquaintance,
remonstrating against it with a perseverance and warmth which
alternately surprised and provoked me. Regarding her warnings as the
voice of that cold ungenerous suspicion which I imagined to be incident
to age, I took a perverse delight in extolling the attractions of my new
friend, and in magnifying their power over me. One prophecy of my
Cassandra was impressed upon my recollection, by its containing the only
severe expression that ever my incorrigible wilfulness could exert from
the forbearing spirit of the Christian. Among other rapturous epithets,
I called Lady St Edmunds my dear enchantress. 'Well may you give her
that name,' said Miss Mortimer, 'for she is drawing you into a circle
where nothing good or holy must tread; and if you will follow her to the
tempter's own ground, you must bid farewell to better spirits. The wise
and the virtuous will one by one forsake you, until you have no guide
but such as lead to evil, and no companions but such as take advantage
of your errors, or share in your ruin.'

It is astonishing, that beings formed to look forward so anxiously to
the future, when anxiety can be of no avail, should often treat it with
such perverse disregard, when foresight might indeed be useful. Will it
be believed, that, from this very conversation, I went to exhibit myself
to half the town, as Lady St Edmunds' companion, by attending her to an
auction?

The sale was in consequence of an execution in the house of a lady of
high fashion; and thither of course came all those of her own rank, who
wished to be relieved of their time, their money, or their curiosity.
Lord Frederick de Burgh, who seemed the almost constant associate of his
fair relative, was of our party. Indeed I could not help observing, upon
all occasions, that his attentions to me were infinitely more
particular, since my father had announced his decision. But I regarded
that decision as final; and merely inferred, that Lord Frederick, like
Miss Arnold, perceived the safety of a flirtation, which could lead to
no consequence; or that, in the true spirit of his sex, he grew eager in
pursuit, when attainment appeared difficult.

As the sale proceeded, a hundred useless toys were exposed, and called
forth a hundred vain and unlovely emotions. Curiosity, admiration,
desire, impatience, envy, and resentment, chased each other over many a
fair face; and the flush of angry disappointment, or of unprofitable
victory, stained many a cheek from whence the blush of modesty had faded
for ever. I took out my pencil to caricature a group, in which a spare
dame, whose face combined no common contrast of projection and
concavity, was darting from her sea-green eyes sidelong flames upon a
china jar, which was surveyed with complacent smiles by its round and
rosy purchaser. But my labours were interrupted, and from an amused
spectator of the scene, I was converted into a keen actor, when the
auctioneer exposed a tortoise-shell dressing-box, magnificently inlaid
with gold. Art had exhausted itself in the elegance of the pattern and
the delicacy of the workmanship. It was every way calculated to arrest
the regards of fine ladies; for, like them, it was useless and expensive
in proportion to its finery. It was put up at fifty guineas; less, as we
were assured by the auctioneer, than half its value. Rather than allow
such matchless beauty to be absolutely thrown away, I bade for the
bauble. It proved equally attractive to others, and my fair opponents
soon raised its price to seventy pounds. There for a while it made a
pause, and no one seemed inclined to go farther; but this was still far
below its value. I hesitated for a few moments; and then, in the
conviction that nobody would bid more, increased my offer. It seems I
was mistaken. The lady with whom, but for my perseverance, the prize
would have remained, measured me with a very contemptuous look, and bade
again with a composure which seemed to say, 'Does the girl fancy she can
contend with me?' This was attacking me on the weak side. I instantly
bade again. The lady coolly did the same. I, growing more warm, went on.
The lady proceeded, with smiles not quite of courtesy; till, in exchange
for my discretion, my temper, and a hundred and fifteen pounds, I had
gained the tortoise-shell dressing-box.

The costly toy was already in my possession, and already every eye was
turned upon me with envy, sarcasm, or compassion, before I remembered
that it was necessary to pay for my purchase. In some perplexity I began
to search for my purse; recollecting, not without dismay, that it did
not contain above twenty guineas. I had indeed a further supply at home,
but the law of the sale required that every purchase should be paid for
upon the spot, and I was obliged to apply to Lady St Edmunds for
assistance. This was the first time that ever I had found occasion to
borrow money; and I shall never forget the embarrassment which it cost
me. With a confusion which would have dearly paid for the possession of
ten thousand baubles, I, in a timid, scarcely intelligible whisper,
begged Lady St Edmunds to lend me the necessary sum, assuring her that
it should be repaid that very day. Her Ladyship at first frankly
consented to my request; but suddenly recollecting herself, declared
that she had not a guinea about her; and, without waiting for my
concurrence, called upon Lord Frederick to relieve my difficulty. Giddy
and imprudent as I was, I shrunk from incurring this obligation to Lord
Frederick. I at first positively refused his aid; and while, for a few
minutes, I sat affecting to examine my purchase, I was cordially wishing
that its materials were still in opposite hemispheres, and endeavouring
to gain courage for a petition to some other of my acquaintance.

I at last fixed upon a young lady of fortune with whom I had contracted
some intimacy; and, under pretence of exhibiting my box, beckoned her
towards me, and requested her to lend me the money. With an aspect of
profound amazement, she exclaimed, 'La, my dear! how can you think of
such a thing? I have not ten pounds in the world. I never have. It is
always spent before I can lay a finger on it.'--'Indeed! I was in hopes
you were in cash just now, for I thought I observed you bid for this
box.'--'Oh, one must bid now and then for a little amusement! But I
assure you I had no thoughts of buying such a splendid affair. I must
leave that to those who have more money than they know what to do with.'

I could perceive a tincture of malice in the smile which accompanied
these words; and turning from her, resumed my conversation with Lady St
Edmunds. Her Ladyship rallied me unmercifully upon what she called my
prudery; asking me, in a very audible whisper, what sort of interest I
expected Lord Frederick to exact, which made me so afraid of becoming
his debtor. Lord Frederick himself joined in the raillery; and,
laughing, offered to recommend me to an honest Jew, if I preferred such
a creditor. Their manner of treating the subject made me almost ashamed
of having refused Lord Frederick's assistance, especially as I was
certain that the obligation might be discharged in an hour. I suspected,
indeed, though I was but imperfectly acquainted with the state of my
funds, that they were insufficient for this demand; but I knew that Miss
Arnold had money, because I had divided my quarterly allowance with
her, and had not since observed her to incur any serious expense.
Besides, I was convinced that my father would permit me to draw upon him
in advance, so that at all events I should be able to discharge my debt
on the following day. I therefore half playfully, half in earnest,
accepted of Lord Frederick's offered aid; and he instantly delivered the
money to me with a gallantry, which showed that a man of fashion can,
upon extraordinary occasions, be polite.

When I had received the notes, I jestingly asked him what security I
should give him for their repayment? Lord Frederick took my hand, and
drawing from my finger a ring of small value, said, with more
seriousness than I expected, 'This shall be my pledge; but you must not
imagine that I shall restore it for a few paltry guineas. You may have
it again as soon as you will, on a fit occasion.' I could have dispensed
with this piece of gallantry, which was conducted too seriously for my
taste; but a lady, like a member of Parliament, must accept of no
favours if she would preserve the right of remonstrance, and I allowed
Lord Frederick to keep the ring.

Soon afterwards we returned home, and I proceeded to examine the state
of my funds. I was astonished to find that my bureau did not contain
above ten pounds. I searched every drawer and concealment, wondering at
intervals what could possibly have become of my money,--a wonder, I
believe, in which the fugitive nature of guineas involves every fair
lady who keeps no exact register of their departure. Thus employed, I
was found by Miss Arnold, to whom I immediately unfolded my dilemma;
calling upon her to assist me with her recollection, as to the disposal
of my funds, and with her purse, in supply of their present deficiency.
On the first point, she was tolerably helpful to me, recalling to my
mind many expenses which I had utterly forgotten; but, in regard to the
second, she protested, with expressions of deep regret, that she could
yield me no assistance. 'You may well look astonished, dearest Ellen,'
pursued she, 'considering your noble generosity to me. But, indeed,
nothing could have happened more unfortunately. It was only yesterday
that I visited my brother, and happened to tell him what a princely
spirit you had, and how liberal you had been to me. The deuce take my
tongue for being so nimble,--but it is all your own fault, Ellen; for
you won't let me praise you to your face, and one can't always be
silent. So, just then, in came a fellow with a long bill for some vile
thing or another, and my brother bid me lend him my money that he might
settle with the creature. What could I do, you know? I could not
refuse. But if I had once guessed that you could possibly want it, I
should as soon have lent him my heart's blood.'

I suffered the tale to conclude without interruption; for indeed I was
fully as much astonished as I looked. I had by no means understood that
my friend was upon such terms with her brother as to incline her to lend
him money; nor that he was in such circumstances as to need to borrow. A
doubt of her truth, however, never once darkened my mind. Self-love
prevented me, as it daily prevents thousands, from making the very
obvious reflection, that one who could be disingenuous with others to
serve me, might be disingenuous with me to serve herself. Miss Arnold
proceeded to reproach herself in the bitterest manner for her
improvidence in parting with the money, and seemed so heartily vexed,
that the little spleen which my disappointment had at first excited
entirely subsided; and I comforted my friend as well as I was able, by
assuring her that my father would advance whatever money I desired.

Miss Arnold now, in her turn, was silent, wearing a look of grave
consideration. 'If I were in your place, Ellen,' said she, at last, 'I
don't think I would mention this matter to Mr Percy.'

'Not mention it!' said I, 'why not?'

'Because,' returned Miss Arnold, 'I see no end it can serve, except to
make him angry. You know his pompous notions; and, after what has
passed, I am sure he will think you borrowing money from Lord Frederick
an act of downright rebellion.'

'Indeed,' returned I, 'that is very likely; but I promised to repay Lord
Frederick to-morrow; and I have no other way of obtaining the money.'

'Poh! my dear, you are so punctilious about trifles! What can it
possibly signify to Lord Frederick whether he be repaid to-morrow, or
the day after?'

'Why, to be sure, it cannot signify much; only, as I have given my
promise, I do not like to break it.'

'Well, really, Ellen, if I were to shut my eyes, I could sometimes fancy
you had been brought up with some queer old aunt in the country. What
difference can one day make? And I am sure, by the end of the week, at
farthest, I could get the money from my brother, and settle the whole
matter peaceably. Do take my advice, and say nothing about it to your
father; he will be so angry; and you know, at the worst, you can tell
him at any time.'

Had my mind been well regulated, or my judgment sound, Miss Arnold's
argument would itself have defeated her purpose; and the very conviction
of my father's disliking my debt to Lord Frederick would have determined
me that it should, at all hazards, be repaid. But I was fated, in many
instances, to suffer the penalty of those perverted habits of mind,
which imposed upon me a sort of moral disability of choosing right, as
often as a choice was presented to me. Misled by an artful adviser, or
rather, perhaps, by my own inveterate abhorrence of reproof, I chose
that clandestine path, in which none can tread with peace or safety. In
this fatal decision began a long train of evil.

Warned by my example, let him who is entering upon life review, with a
suspicious eye, the transactions which he is inclined to conceal from
the appointed guardians of his virtue. If the subject be of moment, let
him be wisely fearful to rely upon his own judgment;--if it be trivial,
let not concealment swell it to disastrous importance. If he have,
unfortunately, a tendency to creep through the winding covered path, let
him not strengthen by one additional act a habit so fatal to the lofty
port of honour. If, like me, he be of a frank and open nature, let him
not, to escape a transient evil, sink the light heart, and pervert the
simple purpose, and bend the erect dignity of truth. Let him who can
tread firm in conscious soundness of mind leave the stealthy course for
those to whom nature has given no better means of attaining their end.
The low and tangled way, the subtle tortuous progress, suits the base
earth-worm; let creatures of a nobler mould advance erect and steady.

Having dissuaded me from using the only means of discharging my debt
without delay, Miss Arnold, like a cautious general, contented herself
with fortifying the post she had taken; and, for the present, carried
her operations no further. But, the next day, she took occasion to ask
me, with a careless air, 'whether I had written a note of excuse to Lord
Frederick?' I answered that I had not thought of it. 'You intend
writing, of course,' said Miss Arnold, with that look of decision which
has often served the purpose of argument.

'Don't you think it will be rather awkward?' said I.

'That you should not write, you mean?--Very awkward, indeed. And then I
am sure you ought never to lose an opportunity of writing a note, for I
know nobody who has such a talent for turning these things neatly.'

The indistinct idea of impropriety which was floating in my mind was put
to flight by the nonchalance of Miss Arnold's manner; for, when reason
and conscience are deposed from their rightful authority at home, it is
amazing how abjectly they learn to bend, not to the passions only, but
to impulse merely external. I wrote the note to Lord Frederick. My
lover, for now I may fairly call him so, contrived to reply to my billet
in such terms as, with the help of Miss Arnold's counsels, produced a
rejoinder. This again occasioned another; and notes, sonnets, epistles
in verse, and billet-doux passed between us, till the folly had nearly
assumed the form of a regular correspondence. All this was, of course,
carried on without the knowledge of my father or Miss Mortimer; and so
rapid are the inroads of evil, that I soon began to find a mysterious
pleasure in the dexterity which compassed this furtive intercourse.

In the mean time, Miss Arnold was in no haste to perform her promise.
Day after day she found some excuse for not going to ask her money, or
some pretence for returning without it; and day after day she persuaded
me to wait for its restitution; till the uneasy feeling of undischarged
obligation subsided by degrees, and the natural disquiet of a debtor was
nearly lost in the giddiness of perpetual amusement.

As the masked ball drew near, my eagerness for it had completely
revived. It may seem strange, considering the multitude of my frivolous
pleasures, that any single one should have awakened such ardour. But a
masquerade was now the only amusement which was new to me; and I had
already begun to experience that craving for novelty which is incident
to all who seek for happiness where it never was and never will be
found,--in bubbles which amuse the sense, but cheat the longing soul.

So entirely was I occupied in anticipating my new pleasure, that I
should have had neither thought nor observation to bestow upon any other
subject, had not conscience sometimes turned my attention to Miss
Mortimer. I thought she looked ill and melancholy. Her complexion,
always delicate, had faded to a sickly hue. Her eyes were sunk and
hollow; and the jealous watchfulness of one who has given cause of
complaint, made me remark that they were often fixed sadly upon me. I
half suspected that she had discovered my intended breach of faith; and
wondered whether it were possible that my misconduct could make such an
impression upon her mind. I was relieved from this suspicion by the
frankness with which she one day lamented to me that my father, for some
reason which she could not divine, refused to permit a party to be
formed for the 5th of May. 'I could have wished,' said she, 'to make
that evening pass more gaily than I fear it will. Dear Ellen, how like
you are to your mother when you blush!'

'Then I am sure,' said I, 'I wish I could blush always, for there is
nobody I should like so much to resemble.'

'Well,' said Miss Mortimer, 'were it not for the fear of making you
vain, I could tell you, that there is a more substantial resemblance;
for she, like you, knew how to resign her strongest inclinations in
compliance with the wishes of her friends.'

This was too much. Conscience-struck, and quite thrown off my guard, I
exclaimed, 'Like me! Oh! she was no more like me, than an angel of light
is to a dark designing----' Recollecting that I was betraying myself, I
stopped.

Miss Mortimer turned upon me a smile so kind, so confiding, that as oft
as it rises to my memory I abhor myself. 'Nay, Ellen,' said she, 'if I
am to be your confessor lay open the sins which do really beset you;
unless, as Mr Maitland would say, you are afraid that I should have a
sinecure.'

'I have a great mind,' cried I, 'to make a resolution, that I will never
do a wrong thing again without confessing it to somebody!'

'The resolution would be a good one,' said Miss Mortimer, 'provided you
could rely upon the judgment and integrity of your confessor; and
provided you are sure that the pain of exposing your faults to another
will not lead you to conceal them more industriously from yourself.'

'Oh! I am sure I could never do wrong without being sensible of it. But
the misfortune is, that people have not the right method of talking of
my faults. They always contrive to say something provoking. You need not
smile. It is not that I am so uncandid that I cannot endure to be
blamed; for there's Juliet often finds fault with me, and I never grow
angry.'

'Well, Ellen,' said Miss Mortimer, 'if ever you should be inclined to
make trial of me, I promise you never intentionally to say any thing
provoking. In dexterity I shall not pretend to vie with Miss Arnold, but
in affectionate interest I will yield to none. You have a claim upon my
indulgence, which your errors can never cancel; especially as I am sure
that they will never lean towards artifice or meanness.'

The heart must be callously vile, which can bear to be stabbed with the
words of abused confidence. I sprung away in search of Miss Arnold, that
I might retract my promise of concealing from Miss Mortimer the affair
of the masquerade. I was met by the dress-maker, who, loaded with
parcels and band-boxes, came to fit on the attire of the fair Fatima;
and, during the hour which was consumed on this operation, the ardour of
my sincerity had cooled so far, that Miss Arnold easily prevailed on me
to let matters remain as we had first arranged them.

How often, I may say how invariably, did my better feelings vanish, ere
they issued into action! But feeling is, in its very nature, transient.
It is at best the meteor's blaze, shedding strong, but momentary day;
while principle, the true principle, be it faint at first as the star
whose ray hath newly reached our earth is yet the living light of the
higher heaven; which never more will leave us in utter darkness, but
lend a steady beam to guide our way.




CHAPTER IX

                         _--There we
    Solicit pleasure, hopeless of success;
    Waste youth in occupations only fit
    For second childhood; and devote old age
    To sports which only childhood could excuse.
    There they are happiest who dissemble best
    Their weariness; and they the most polite,
    Who squander time and treasure with a smile,
    Though at their own destruction._

                                             Cowper.


The fifth of May arrived; and never did lover, waiting the hour of
meeting, suffer more doubts and tremours than I did, lest Mrs Beetham
should disappoint me of my evening's paraphernalia. Although I had
ordered the dress to be at my bed-side as soon as I awoke, the faithless
mantua-maker detained it till after two o'clock; and the intermediate
hours were consumed in fits of anger, suspense, and despondency. At last
it came; and I hastened to ascertain its becomingness and effect. I knew
that Miss Mortimer was closeted with a medical friend; I had, therefore,
no interruption to fear from her. Yet I locked myself into my
dressing-room, because I could not, without constraint, allow even Miss
Arnold to witness those rehearsals of vanity, which I was not ashamed to
exhibit before Him who remembers that we are but dust. Others may smile
at this and many other instances of my folly. I look back upon them as
on the illusions of delirium, and shudder whilst I smile.

I was practising before a looking-glass the attitudes most favourable to
the display of my dress and figure, when my attention was drawn by the
sound of bustle in the staircase. I opened my door to discover the cause
of the noise, and perceived some of the servants bearing Miss Mortimer,
to all appearance lifeless. In horror and alarm I sprung towards her;
and in answer to some incoherent questions, I learnt, that she had had a
long private conference with Dr ----, and that he had scarcely left the
house, when she had fainted away. A servant had hastened to recall the
surgeon, but his carriage had driven off too quickly to be overtaken.

The dastardly habits of self-indulgence had so estranged me from the
very forms of sickness or of sorrow, that I now stood confounded by
their appearance; and if a menial, whose very existence I scarcely
deigned to remember, had not far excelled me in considerate presence of
mind, the world might then have lost one of its chief ornaments, and I
the glorious lesson of a Christian's life--of a Christian's death! By
means of the simple prescriptions of this poor girl, Miss Mortimer
revived. Her first words were those of thankfulness for all our cares;
her next request that she might be left alone. Recollecting my strange
attire, which alarm had driven from my mind, I felt no disinclination to
obey; but the girl, whose assistance had already been so useful, begged
for permission to remain. 'Indeed, ma'am,' said she, 'you ought not to
be left alone while you are so weak and ill.'

'Oh I am weaker than a child!' cried Miss Mortimer; 'but go, my dear: I
shall not be alone! I know where the weakest shall assuredly find
strength!'

The countenance of the person to whom she spoke gave signal of
intelligence; the rest stared with vacant wonder. All obeyed Miss
Mortimer's command; and I hastened to lay aside my Turkish drapery,
which, for some minutes, I had almost unconsciously been screening from
observation behind the magnitude of our fat housekeeper.

As soon as I had resumed my ordinary dress, I stole back to the door of
Miss Mortimer's apartment. I listened for a while,--but all was still. I
entered softly, and beheld Miss Mortimer upon her knees, her hands
clasped in supplication; the flush of hope glowing through the tears
which yet trembled on her cheek; her eyes raised with meek confidence,
as the asking infant looks up in his mother's face. I was not
unacquainted with the attitude of devotion. _That_ I might have studied
even at our theatres, where a mockery of prayer often insults both taste
and decency. I had even preserved from my childish days a habit of
uttering every morning a short 'form of sound words.' But the spirit of
prayer had never touched my heart; and when I beheld the signs of vital
warmth attend that which I had considered as altogether lifeless, it
seemed like the moving pictures in the gallery of Otranto, portentous of
something strange and terrible. 'Good heavens! my dear Miss Mortimer,'
exclaimed I, advancing towards her as she rose, and wiped the tears from
her eyes, 'surely something very distressing has happened to you.'

'Nothing new has happened,' answered she, holding out her hand kindly
towards me; 'only I have an additional proof that I am, by nature, a
poor, timid, trustless creature.'

'Ah!' cried I, 'do trust me. I can be as secret as the grave, and there
is nothing on earth I won't do to make you comfortable again.'

'I thank you, dear Ellen,' answered Miss Mortimer; 'but I have no secret
to tell; and, to make me comfortable, you must minister to both body and
mind. I have long been trifling with a dangerous disorder. I have acted
in regard to it as we are wont to do in regard to the diseases of our
souls,--deceived myself as to its existence, because I feared to
encounter the cure,--and now I must submit to an operation so tedious,
so painful!'--She stopped, shuddering. I was so much shocked, that I had
scarcely power to enquire whether there were danger in the experiment.
'Some danger there must be,' said Miss Mortimer; 'but it is not the
danger which I fear. Even such cowards as I can meet that which they are
daily accustomed to contemplate. If it had been the will of Heaven, I
would rather have died than----But it is not for me to choose. Shall I
presume to reject any means by which my life may be prolonged? Often,
often have I vowed,' continued she with strong energy of manner, 'that I
would not "live to myself." And was all false and hollow? Was this but
the vow of the hypocrite, the self-deceiver?'

'Oh no!' cried I, 'that is impossible. Before I knew you I might be
prejudiced. But now I see that you are always good,--always the same.
You cannot be a hypocrite.'

This testimony, extorted from me by uniform, consistent uprightness, was
answered only by a distrustful shake of the head; for Miss Mortimer
habitually lent a suspicious ear to the praise of her own virtues; and
was accustomed to judge of her thoughts and actions, not by the opinion
of others, but by a careful comparison with the standard of excellence.
Tears trickled down her cheeks while she upbraided herself as one who,
having pretended to give up all, kept back a part; and even those tears
she reproached as symbols of distrust and fear, rather than of
repentance. We soon grow weary of witnessing strong feeling in which we
cannot fully sympathise. I hinted to Miss Mortimer that a short rest
would compose her spirits, and recruit her strength; and, having
persuaded her to lie down, I left her.

Only a few months had passed since the fairest dream of pleasure would
have vanished from my mind at the thought that the life of the meanest
servant of our household was to hang upon the issue of a doubtful,
dangerous experiment. Only a few months had passed since the sufferings
of a friend would have banished sleep from my pillow, and joy from my
chosen delights. But intemperate pleasure is not more fatal to the
understanding than to the heart. It is not more adverse to the 'spirit
of a sound mind,' than to the 'spirit of love.' Social pleasures, call
we them! Let the name no more be prostituted to that which is poison to
every social feeling. Four months of dissipation had elapsed; and the
distress, the danger of my own friend, and my mother's friend, now made
no change in my scheme of pleasure for the evening. I was merely
perplexed how to impart that scheme to the poor invalid. Conscience,
indeed, did not fail to remind me, that to bestow this night upon
amusement was robbery of friendship and humanity; but I was unhappily
practised in the art of silencing her whispers. I assured myself that if
my presence could have been essentially useful to Miss Mortimer, I
should cheerfully have sacrificed my enjoyment to hers; but I was
certain that if I remained at home, the sight of her melancholy would
depress me so much as to make my company a mere burden. I endeavoured to
persuade myself that, after the scene of the morning, my spirits needed
a cordial; and a sudden fit of economy represented to me the impropriety
of throwing aside as useless, a dress which had cost an incredible sum.
At the recollection of this dress, my thoughts at once flew from
excusing my folly to anticipating its delights; and, in a moment, I was
already in the ball-room, surrounded with every pleasure, but those of
reason, taste, and virtue.

This heartless selfishness may well awaken resentment or contempt; but
it ought not to excite surprise. The sickly child, whose helplessness
needs continual care, whose endless cravings require endless supplies,
whose incessant complainings extort incessant consolation, acquires the
undeserved partiality of his mother. The very flower which we have
cherished in the sunshine, and sheltered from the storm, attains, in
our regard, a value not its own; and whoever confines his cares, and his
ingenuity, to his own gratification, will find, that self-love is not
less rapid, or less vigorous in its progress, than any better affection
of the soul.

All my endeavours, however, could not make me satisfied with my
determination. I therefore resorted to my convenient friend, with whose
honied words I could always qualify my self-upbraidings. I opened the
case, by saying, that I believed we should be obliged to give up the
masquerade after all; but I should have been terribly disappointed if
that opinion had passed uncontroverted. I was, however, in no danger.
Miss Arnold knew exactly when she might contradict without offence; and
did not fail to employ all her persuasion on the side where it was least
necessary. This question, therefore, was quickly settled; but another
still remained,--how were we to announce our purpose to Miss Mortimer?
With this part of the subject inclination had nothing to do; and
therefore we found this point so much more difficult to decide, that
when we were dressed, and ready to depart, the matter was still in
debate.

It was, however, suddenly brought to an issue, by the appearance of Miss
Mortimer. She had remained alone in her apartment during the early part
of the evening; and now entered the drawing-room with her wonted aspect
of serene benevolence, a little 'sicklied o'er by the pale cast of
thought.' I involuntarily retreated behind Miss Arnold, who herself
could not help shrinking back. Miss Mortimer advanced towards her with
the most unconscious air of kindness. 'You are quite equipped for
conquest, Miss Arnold,' said she. 'I never saw any thing so gracefully
fantastic.' She had now obtained a view of my figure, and the truth
seemed to flash upon her at once; for she started, and changed colour.

A dead silence followed, for indeed I did not dare to look up, much less
speak. Miss Arnold first recovered herself. 'Mr Percy,' said she,
endeavouring to speak carelessly, 'has given Ellen and me permission to
go out for an hour.'

'Yes,' rejoined I hesitatingly, 'papa has given us leave, and we shall
only stay a very little while.'--Miss Mortimer made no answer. I stole a
glance at her, and saw that she was pale as death. I ventured a step
nearer to her. 'You are not very angry with us,' said I.

'No, Miss Percy,' said she, in a low constrained voice; 'I never claimed
a right to dictate where you should or should not go. There was,
therefore, on this occasion, the less necessity for having recourse
to----'

She left the sentence unfinished; but my conscience filled up the pause.
'Indeed, my dear Miss Mortimer,' said I, for at that moment I was
thoroughly humbled, 'I never meant to go without your knowledge. Miss
Arnold will tell you that we have been all day contriving how we should
mention it to you.'

'Your word did not use to need confirmation,' said Miss Mortimer,
sighing heavily. 'I did hope,' continued she, 'that you would have
spared to me a part of this evening; for I have many things to say, and
this is the last----'

Miss Mortimer stopped, cleared her throat, bit her quivering lip, and
began industriously to arrange the drapery upon my shoulder; but all
would not do,--she burst into tears. I could not withstand Miss
Mortimer's emotion, and, throwing my arms round her neck,--'My dear,
dear friend,' I cried, 'be angry with me, scold me as much as you will,
only do not grieve yourself. If I could once have guessed that you were
to be ill to-night, I should never have thought of this vile ball; and I
am sure, if it will please you, I will send away the carriage, and stay
at home still.'

This proposal was perfectly sincere, but not very intelligible; for the
thought of such a sacrifice overpowered me so completely, that the last
words were choked with sobs. Miss Mortimer seemed at first to hesitate
whether she should not accept of my offer; but, after a few moments'
reflection, 'No, Ellen,' said she, 'I will not cause you so cruel a
disappointment; for surely--surely this masquerade has seized upon a
most disproportionate share of your wishes. You must soon be left to
your own discretion; and why should I impose an unavailing hardship? Go
then, my love, and be as happy as you can.'

My heart leapt light at this concession. 'Dear, good, kind Miss
Mortimer,' cried I, kissing her cheek, 'do not be afraid of me. I assure
you, I shall be more discreet and prudent this evening than ever I was
in my life.'

Miss Mortimer gave me an April smile. 'This is not much like the garb of
discretion,' said she, looking at my dress, which indeed approached the
utmost limit of fashionable allurement. 'It seems time that I should
cease to advise, else I should beg of you to make some little addition
to your dress. You may meet with people, even at a masquerade, who think
that no charm can atone for any defect of modesty; and I should imagine,
that your spirit would scarcely brook the remarks they might make.'

'I am sure,' said I, with a blush which owed its birth as much to pique
as to shame, 'I never thought of being immodest, nor of any thing else,
except to look as well as I could; but if it will please you, I shall
get a tucker, and let you cover me as much as you will.'

Miss Mortimer good-naturedly accepted this little office; saying, while
she performed it, 'it is a good principle in dress, that the chief use
of clothing is concealment. I am persuaded, that you would never offend
in this point, were you to remember, that if ever an exposed figure
pleases, it must be in some way in which no modest woman would wish to
please.'

Meanwhile Miss Arnold, who was even more impatient than myself to be
gone, had ordered the carriage to the door. Miss Mortimer took leave of
me with a seriousness of manner approaching to solemnity; and we
departed. The moment we were alone, Juliet proposed to undo Miss
Mortimer's labours, declaring that 'they had quite made a fright of me.'
Fortunately for such a world as this, the most questionable principle
may produce insulated acts of propriety. My pride for once espoused the
right side. 'Forbear, Juliet!' cried I indignantly. 'Would you have
people to look at me as they do at the very outcasts of womankind,--some
with pity, some with scorn?'

Miss Arnold's 'hour' had elapsed long before the concourse of carriages
would allow us to alight at Lady St Edmunds' door. On my first entrance,
I was so bewildered by the confusion of the scene, and the grotesque
figures of the masks, that I could scarcely recognise the mistress of
the revels, although we had previously concerted the dress which she was
to wear. She presently, however, relieved this dilemma, by addressing me
in character; though she was, or pretended to be, unable to penetrate my
disguise. The tinge of seriousness which Miss Mortimer had left upon my
spirits being aided by the alarm created by so many unsightly shapes, I
determined not to quit Lady St Edmunds' side during the evening; and was
just going to tell her my name in a whisper, when I was accosted by a
Grand Signior, whom, in spite of his disguise, I thought I discovered to
be Lord Frederick de Burgh. I was somewhat surprised at this coincidence
in our characters, as I had kept that in which I intended to appear a
profound secret from all but Miss Arnold, who protested that she had
never breathed it to any human being. Lord Frederick, however, for I was
convinced that it was he, addressed me as a stranger; and, partly from
the vanity of pleasing in a new character, I answered in the same
strain. We were speedily engaged in a conversation, in the course of
which a conviction of our previous acquaintance placed me so much at
ease with my Turk, that I felt little disturbance, when, on looking
round, I perceived that our matron had mingled with the crowd, leaving
Miss Arnold and me to his protection. I supposed, however, to my friend,
that we should go in search of Lady St Edmunds; and, still attended by
our Grand Signior, we began our round.

And here let me honestly confess, that my pastime very poorly
compensated the concealment, anxiety, and remorse which it had already
cost me. Even novelty, that idol of spoilt children, could scarcely
defend me from weariness and disgust. In the more intellectual part of
my anticipated amusement I was completely disappointed; for the attempts
made to support character were few and feeble. The whole entertainment,
for the sake of which I had broken my promise, implied, if not
expressed,--for the sake of which I had given the finishing stroke to
the unkindness, ingratitude, and contumacy of my behaviour towards my
mother's friend,--amounted to nothing more than looking at a multitude
of motley habits, for the most part mean, tawdry, and unbecoming; and
listening to disjointed dialogues, consisting of dull questions and
unmeaning answers, thinly bestrown with constrained witticisms, and puns
half a century old. The easy flow of conversation, which makes even
trifles pass agreeably, was destroyed by the supposed necessity of being
smart; and the eloquence of the human eye, of the human smile, was
wanting to add interest to what was vapid, and kindliness to what was
witty. Lord Frederick, indeed, did what he could to enliven the scene.
He pointed out the persons whom he knew through their disguises; and
desired me to observe how generally each affected the character which he
found the least attainable in common life. 'That,' said he, 'is
Glendower in the dress of a conjurer. That virgin of the sun is Lady
B----, whose divorce-bill is to be before the House to-morrow. That
Minerva is Lady Maria de Burgh; and that figure next to her is Miss
Sarah Winterfield, who has stuck a flaxen wig upon her grizzled pate
that she may for once pass for a Venus.'

'If I am to judge by your rule,' said I, 'you must be content to be
taken for some Christian slave, snatching a transitory greatness.'

'You guess well, fair Fatima; I am indeed a slave; and these royal robes
are meant to conceal my chains from all but my lovely mistress.'

'Why then do you confess them so freely to me?'

'Because I am persuaded that this envious mask conceals the face of my
sultana.'

'No, no; by your rule I must be some stern old gouvernante, who have
locked up your sultana, and come to seize the pleasures which I deny to
her.'

'Oh! here my rule is useless; for, from what I see, I can guess very
correctly what is concealed. For instance, there is first a pair of
saucy hazel eyes, sparkling through their long fringes. Cheeks of
roses----'

'Pshaw! commonplace----'

'Nay, not common vulgar country roses--but living and speaking, like the
roses in a poet's fancy.'

'Well, that's better, go on.'

'A sly, mischievous, dimple, that, Parthian-like, kills and is fled.'

'You can guess flatteringly, I see.'

'Yes; and truly too. Nature would never mould a form like this, and
leave her work imperfect; therefore there is but one face that can
belong to it; and that face is--Miss Percy's.'

'And I think nature would never have bestowed such talents for flattery
without giving a corresponding dauntlessness of countenance; and that I
am persuaded belongs only to Lord Frederick de Burgh.'

My attention was diverted from the Sultan's reply by a deep low voice,
which, seemingly close to my ear, pronounced the words, 'Use caution;
you have need of it.' I started, and turned to see who had spoken; but a
crowd of masks were round us, and I could not distinguish the speaker, I
applied to Miss Arnold and the Turk, but neither of them had observed
the circumstance. I was rather inclined to ascribe it to chance, not
conceiving that any one present could be interested in advising me; yet
the solemn tone in which the words were uttered, uniting with the
impression which, almost unknown to myself, Miss Mortimer's averseness
to my present situation had left upon my mind, I again grew anxious to
find protection with Lady St Edmunds.

Being now a little more in earnest in my search, I soon discovered the
object of it, and I immediately made myself known to her. Lady St
Edmunds appeared to receive the intelligence with delighted surprise,
and reproached me kindly with having concealed myself so long; then
suddenly transferred her reproaches to herself for having, even for a
moment, overlooked my identity, 'since, however disguised, my figure
remained as unique as that of the Medicean Venus.' I can smile now at
the simplicity with which I swallowed this and a hundred other
absurdities of the same kind. A superior may always apply his flattery
with very little caution, secure that it will be gratefully received;
and the young are peculiarly liable to its influence, because their
estimate of themselves being as yet but imperfectly formed, they are
glad of any testimony on the pleasing side.

I kept my station for some time between Lady St Edmunds and Lord
Frederick, drinking large draughts of vanity and pleasure, till Miss
Mortimer and my unknown adviser were alike forgotten. A group of
Spaniards having finished a fandango, the Countess proposed that Lord
Frederick and I should succeed them in a Turkish dance. A faint
recollection crossed my mind of the disgust with which I had read a
description of this Mahometan exhibition, so well suited to those whose
prospective sensuality extends even beyond the grave. I refused,
therefore, alleging ignorance as my excuse; but, as I had an absolute
passion for dancing, I offered to join in any more common kind of my
favourite exercise. Lady St Edmunds, however, insisted that, unless in
character, it would be awkward to dance at all; and that I might easily
copy the Turkish dances which I had seen performed upon the stage. These
had, so far as I could see, no resemblance to the licentious spectacles
of which I had read, excepting what consisted in the shameless attire of
the performers, in which I sincerely believe that the _Christian_
dancing-women have pre-eminence. Blessed be the providential
arrangements which make the majority of womankind bow to the restraints
of public opinion! Hardened depravity may despise them, piety may
sacrifice them to a sense of duty: but, in the intermediate classes,
they hold the place of wisdom and of virtue. They direct many a judgment
which ought not to rely on itself; they aid faltering rectitude with the
strength of numbers; for, degenerate as we are, numbers are still upon
the side of feminine decorum. Had I been unmasked, no earthly inducement
would have made me consent to this blamable act of levity; but, in the
intoxication of spirits which was caused by the adulation of my
companions, the consciousness that I was unknown to all but my tempters
induced me to yield, and I suffered Lord Frederick to lead me out. Yet,
concealed, as I fancied myself, I performed with a degree of
embarrassment which must have precluded all grace; though this
embarrassment only served to enhance the praises which were lavished on
me by Lord Frederick.

When the dance was ended, and I was going eagerly to rejoin Lady St
Edmunds, I looked round for her in vain; but Miss Arnold, with an
acquaintance who had joined her, waited for me, and once more we set out
in search of our erratic hostess. In the course of our progress, we
passed a buffet spread with wines, ices, and sherbets. Exhausted with
the heat occasioned by the crowd, my mask, and the exercise I had just
taken, I was going to swallow an ice; when Lord Frederick, vehemently
dissuading me from so dangerous a refreshment, poured out a large glass
of champagne, and insisted upon my drinking it. I had raised it to my
lips, when I again heard the same low solemn voice which had before
addressed me. 'Drink sparingly,' it said, 'the cup is poisoned.' Looking
hastily round, I thought I discovered that the warning came from a
person in a black domino; but in his air and figure I could trace
nothing which was familiar to my recollection. My thoughts, I know not
why, glanced towards Mr Maitland; but there was no affinity whatever
between his tall athletic figure, and the spare, bending diminutive form
of the black domino.

No metaphorical meaning occurring to my mind, the caution of the mask
appeared so manifestly absurd, that I concluded it to be given in jest;
and, with a careless smile, drank the liquor off. Through my previous
fatigue, it produced an immediate effect upon my spirits, which rose to
an almost extravagant height. I rattled, laughed; and, but for the
crowd, would have skipped along the chalked floors, as I again passed
from room to room in quest of Lady St Edmunds. Our search, however was
vain. In none of the crowded apartments was Lady St Edmunds to be found.

In traversing one of the lobbies, we observed a closed door; Lord
Frederick threw it open, and we entered, still followed by Miss Arnold
and her companion. The room to which it led was splendidly furnished.
Like the rest of those we had seen, it was lighted up, and supplied with
elegant refreshments. But it was entirely unoccupied, and the fresh
coolness of the air formed a delightful contrast to the loaded
atmosphere which we had just quitted. Having shut out the crowd, Lord
Frederick, throwing himself on the sofa by my side, advised me to lay
aside my mask; and the relief was too agreeable to be rejected. He
himself unmasked also, and, handsome as he always undoubtedly was, I
think never saw him appear to such advantage. While Miss Arnold and her
companion busied themselves in examining the drawings which hung round
the room, Lord Frederick whispered in my ear a hundred flatteries,
seasoned with that degree of passion, which, according to the humour of
the hour, destroys all their power to please, or makes them doubly
pleasing. If I know myself, I never felt the slightest spark of real
affection for Lord Frederick; yet, whether it was that pleased vanity
can sometimes take the form of inclination, or whether, to say all in
Miss Mortimer's words, 'having ventured upon the tempter's own ground,
better spirits had forsaken me,' I listened to my admirer with a favour
different from any which I had ever before shown him.

I even carried this folly so far as to suffer him to detain me after
Miss Arnold and her companion had quitted the room, although I began to
suspect that I could already discern the effects of the wine, which,
from time to time, he swallowed freely. Not that it appeared to affect
his intellects; on the contrary, it seemed to inspire him with
eloquence; for he pleaded his passion with increasing ardour, and
pursued every advantage in my sportive opposition, with a subtlety which
I had never suspected him of possessing. He came at length to the point
of proposing an expedition to Scotland, urging it with a warmth and
dexterity which I was puzzled how to evade. In this hour of folly, I
mentally disposed of his request among the subjects which might deserve
to be reconsidered. Meantime, I opposed the proposal with a playful
resistance, which I intended should leave my sentence in suspense, but
which I have since learnt to know that lovers prefer to more direct
victory. Lord Frederick at first affected the raptures of a successful
petitioner; and though I contrived to set him right in this particular,
his extravagance increased, till I began to wish for some less elevated
companion. He was even in the act of attempting to snatch a kiss,--for a
lord in the inspiration of champagne is not many degrees more gentle or
respectful than a clown,--when the door flew open, and admitted Lady
Maria de Burgh, Mrs Sarah Winterfield, and my black domino.

Our indiscretions never flash more strongly upon our view than when
reflected from the eye of an enemy. All the impropriety of my situation
bursting upon me at once, the blood rushed in boiling torrents to my
face and neck; while Mrs Sarah, with a giggle, in which envy mingled
with triumphant detection, exclaimed, 'Bless my heart! we have
interrupted a flirtation!'--'A flirtation!' repeated Lady Maria, with a
toss expressive of ineffable disdain; while I, for the first time,
shrinking from her eye, stood burning with shame and anger. Lord
Frederick's spirits were less fugitive:--'Damn it!' cried he
impatiently, 'if either of you had a thousandth part of this lady's
charms, you might expect a man sometimes to forget himself; but I'll
answer for it, neither of you is in any danger. Forgive me, I beseech
you, dear Miss Percy,' continued he, turning to me: 'if you would not
make me the most unhappy fellow in England, you must forgive me.' But I
was in no humour to be conciliated by a compliment, even at the expense
of Lady Maria. 'Oh! certainly, my Lord,' returned I, glancing from him
to his sister; 'I can consider impertinence and presumption only as
diseases which run in the family.' I tried to laugh as I uttered this
sally; but the effort failed, and I burst into tears.

Lord Frederick, now really disconcerted, endeavoured to soothe me by
every means in his power; while the two goddesses stood viewing us with
shrugs and sneers, and the black domino appeared to contemplate the
scene with calm curiosity. More mortified than ever by my own
imbecility, I turned from them all, uttering some impatient reflection
on the inattention of my hostess. 'She will not be so difficult of
discovery _now_,' said the black domino sarcastically; 'you will find
her with your convenient friend in the great drawing-room.' I followed
the direction of my mysterious inspector, and found Lady St Edmunds, as
he had said, in company with Miss Arnold.

Angrily reproaching my friend with her unseasonable desertion, and even
betraying some displeasure against the charming Countess, I announced my
intention of returning home immediately. Lady St Edmunds endeavoured to
dissuade me, but I was inflexible; and at last Lord Frederick, who still
obsequiously attended me, offered to go and enquire for my carriage. 'I
commit my sultana to you,' said he, with an odd kind of emphasis to his
aunt. She seemed fully inclined to accept the trust; for she assailed my
ill-humour with such courteous submissions, such winning blandishments,
such novel remark, and such amusing repartee, that, in spite of myself,
I recovered both temper and spirits.

Such was the fascination which she could exercise at pleasure, that I
scarcely observed the extraordinary length of time which Lord Frederick
took to execute his mission. I was beginning, however, to wonder that he
did not return, when I was once more accosted by the black domino.
'Infatuated girl!' said he, in the low impressive whisper, to which I
now began to listen with alarm, 'whither are you going?'

'Home,' returned I, 'where I wish I had been an hour ago.'

'Are you false as well as weak?' rejoined the mask. 'You are not
destined to see home this night.'

'Not see home!' repeated I, with amazement. 'What is it you mean,--or
have you any meaning beyond a teasing jest?'

'I know,' replied the mask, 'that the carriage waits which conveys you
to Scotland.'

I started at the odd coincidence between the stranger's intelligence and
my previous conversation with Lord Frederick. Yet a moment's
consideration convinced me, that his behaviour either proceeded from
waggery or mistake. 'Get better information,' said I, 'before you
commence fortune-teller. It is my father's carriage and servants that
wait for me.'

The mask shook his head, and retreated without answering. I enquired of
Lady St Edmunds whether she knew him, but she was unacquainted with his
appearance. I was just going to relate to her the strange conversation
which he had carried on with me in an under-voice, when Lord Frederick
returned to tell me, that the carriage was at the door; adding, that he
feared he must hasten me, lest it should be obliged to drive off.
Hastily taking leave of Lady St Edmunds, Miss Arnold and I took each an
arm of Lord Frederick, and hurried down stairs.

My foot was already on the step of the carriage, when I suddenly
recoiled:--

'This is not our carriage?' cried I.

'It is mine, which is the same thing,' said Lord Frederick.

'No, no! it is not the same,' said I, with quickness; the warning of the
black domino flashing on my recollection. 'I should greatly prefer going
in my own.'

'I fear,' returned Lord Frederick, 'that it will be impossible for yours
to come up in less than an hour or two.'

I own, I felt some pleasure on hearing him interrupted by the voice of
my strange adviser. 'If Miss Percy will trust to me,' said he, 'I shall
engage to place her in her carriage, in one tenth part of that time.'

'Trust you!' cried Lord Frederick very angrily.--'And who are you?'

'Miss Percy's guard for the present,' answered the mask dryly.

'Her guard!' exclaimed Lord Frederick. 'From whom?'

'From you, my Lord, if you make it necessary,' retorted the stranger.

'Oh mercy,' interrupted Miss Arnold, 'here will be a quarrel:--do, for
heaven's sake, Ellen, let us be gone.'

'Do not alarm yourself, young lady,' said the stranger, in a sarcastic
tone; 'the dispute will end very innocently. Miss Percy, let me lead you
to your carriage; or, if you prefer remaining here while I go in search
of it, for once show yourself firm, and resist every attempt to entice
you from this spot.'

I embraced the latter alternative, and the stranger left us. The moment
he was gone, Miss Arnold began to wonder who the impudent officious
fellow could be, and to enquire whether we were to wait his pleasure in
the lobby for the rest of the night. She protested her belief, that I
had been infected by that precise old maid Miss Mortimer; and could by
no means imagine what was my objection to Lord Frederick's carriage. I
coldly persisted in preferring my own, though my suspicions were
staggered by the readiness with which Lord Frederick appeared to
acquiesce in my decision. Notwithstanding his impatience at the
stranger's first interference, he now treated the matter so carelessly,
that my doubts were fast giving ground, when the black domino returned,
followed by one of my servants, who informed me that my carriage was now
easily accessible.

Leaving Lord Frederick to Miss Arnold, I gave my hand to my mysterious
guardian; and, curiosity mingling with a desire to show some little
return of civility, I enquired, whether he would allow me to set him
down. The stranger declined; but, offering to escort me home, took his
place by my side; giving orders to a servant in a plain but handsome
livery, that his chariot should follow him to Mr Percy's.

During our drive, I was occupied in endeavouring to discover the name of
my unknown attendant, and the means by which he had gained his
intelligence. Upon the first point he was utterly impracticable. Upon
the second, he frankly declared, that having no business at the
masquerade, except to watch me and those with whom I appeared connected
for the evening, he had, without difficulty, traced all our motions; but
why he had chosen such an office he refused to discover. When he again
mentioned the intended expedition to Scotland, Miss Arnold averred that
she was lost in astonishment, and asserted her utter incredulity. I too
expressed my doubts; alleging, that Lord Frederick could not believe me
weak enough to acquiesce in such an outrage. 'As I have not the honour
of Miss Percy's acquaintance,' returned the stranger dryly, 'I cannot
determine, whether a specious flatterer had reason to despair of
reconciling her to a breach of propriety.' The glow of offended pride
rose to my cheek; but the carriage stopped, and I had no time to reply;
for the stranger instantly took his leave.

As soon as he was gone, Miss Arnold grew more fervent in her expressions
of wonder at his strange conduct, and his more strange discovery, of
which she repeated her entire disbelief. I had no defined suspicion of
my friend, nor even any conviction of Lord Frederick's intended
treachery; but I perceived that there was something in the events of the
night which I could not unravel; and, weary and bewildered, I listened
to her without reply.

We were about to separate for the night, when a servant brought me a
note which, he said, he had found in the bottom of the carriage. It was
not mine; it belonged to the stranger. 'Oh now!' cried Miss Arnold,
eagerly advancing to look at it, 'we shall discover the mystery.' But I
was not in a communicative humour; so, putting the note in my pocket, I
bade her good night more coldly than I had ever done before, and retired
to my chamber.

The note was addressed to a person known to me only by character; but
one whose name commands the respect of the wise, and the love of the
virtuous. The hand-writing, I thought, was that of Mr Maitland. This
circumstance strongly excited my curiosity. But, could I take a base
advantage of the accident which empowered me to examine a paper never
meant for my inspection? The thing was not to be thought of; and I
turned my reflections to the events of the evening.

Nothing agreeable attended the retrospect. Conscience, an after-wise
counsellor, upbraided me with the futility of that pleasure which I had
purchased at the price of offending my own friend, and my mother's
friend. The temptation, which in its approach had allured me with the
forms of life and joy, had passed by; and to the backward glance, seemed
all lifeless and loathsome. Unknown and concealed, I had failed to
attract the attention which was now becoming customary to me. Lady St
Edmunds, whose society had been my chief attraction to this ill-fated
masquerade, had appeared rather to shun than to seek me. Above all, the
indecorous situation in which I had been surprised by Lady Maria, and
the aspect which her malice might give to my indiscretion, haunted me,
like an evil genius, meeting my 'mind's eye' at every turn.

I was glad to revert from these tormenting thoughts, to my speculations
concerning the black domino. I was unable to divine the motive which
could induce a stranger to interest himself in my conduct. I fancied,
indeed, that I recognised Mr Maitland's hand-writing; and thought for a
moment that he might have instigated my mysterious protector. But what
concern had Mr Maitland in my behaviour? What interest could I possibly
have excited in the composed, stately, impracticable Mr Maitland?
Besides, I was neither sure that he really was the writer of the note,
nor that its contents had any reference to me. I again carefully
examined the address, but still I remained in doubt. There could be no
_great_ harm, I thought, in looking merely at the signature. I threw the
cautious glance of guilt round the room, and then ventured to convince
myself. Before I could restore the note to its folds, I had undesignedly
read a few words which roused my eager curiosity. Almost unconscious of
what I was doing, I finished the sentence which contained them.

Those who are accustomed to watch the progress of temptation, will be at
no loss to guess the issue of this ominous first step. Had I been
earnest in my resolution to pursue the right path, I ought to have put
it out of my own power to choose the wrong. As it was, I first
wished--then doubted--hesitated--ventured--and ventured farther--till
there was nothing left for curiosity to desire, or honour to forego. The
note was as follows:--

     'My dear sir,--Our worthy friend, Miss Mortimer, has just now sent
     to beg that I will follow her young charge to Lady St E's masked
     ball, whither she has been decoyed by that unprincipled woman. I
     fear there is some sinister purpose against this poor thoughtless
     girl. But it is impossible for me to go. The great cause which I am
     engaged to plead to-morrow must not be postponed to any personal
     consideration. Will you then undertake the office which I must
     refuse? Will you watch over the safety of this strange being, who
     needs an excuse every moment, and finds one in every heart? She
     must not, and shall not, be entrapped by that heartless Lord F. He
     cannot love her. He may covet her fortune--perhaps her person too,
     as he would covet any other fashionable gewgaw; but he is safe from
     the witchery of her _naif_ sensibility, her lovely singleness of
     mind. I enclose the description which has been sent me of her
     dress. Should another wear one similar, you will distinguish Miss
     Percy by a peculiar elegance of air and motion. She is certainly
     the most graceful of women. Or you may know her by the inimitable
     beauty of her arm. I once saw it thrown round her father's neck. My
     dear friend, if you are not most particularly engaged, lose not a
     moment. She is already among these designing people. I have told
     you that I am interested in her, for the sake of Miss Mortimer; but
     I did not express half the interest I feel.

                                             'Yours faithfully,
                                                       'H. MAITLAND.'

In spite of the checks of conscience, I read this billet with
exultation. I skipped before my looking-glass; and, tossing back the
long tresses which I had let fall on my shoulders, surveyed with no
small complacency the charms which were acknowledged by the stoical Mr
Maitland. Then I again glanced over some of his expressions, wondering
what kind of interest it was that he had 'left half told.' Was it love?
thought I. But when I recollected his general manner towards me, I was,
in spite of vanity and the billet, obliged to doubt. I resolved,
however, to ascertain the point; 'and if he be readily caught,' thought
I, 'what glorious revenge will I take for all his little sly sarcasms.'
To play off a fool was nothing; that I could do every day. But the
grave, wise Mr Maitland would be so divertingly miserable, that I was in
raptures at the prospect of my future amusement.

Along with this inundation of vanity, however, came its faithful
attendant, vexation of spirit. I could not doubt, that the domino would
report to his employer the events of the evening. I knew that Mr
Maitland's notions of feminine decorum were particularly strict; and I
felt almost as much chagrined by the thought of his being made
acquainted with the real extent of my indiscretion, as by the prospect
of the form which it might take in the world's eye under the colouring
of Lady Maria's malice. Harassed with fatigue, my mind tossed between
self-accusings, disappointment, curiosity, and mortification, I passed a
restless night; nor was it till late in the morning that I fell into a
feverish unquiet slumber.




CHAPTER X

    _Think you the soul, when this life's rattles cease,
    Has nothing of more manly to succeed!
    Contract the taste immortal. Learn e'en now
    To relish what alone subsists hereafter._

                                             Young


The next morning, on entering the breakfast-parlour, the first object
which met my eye was Miss Mortimer, in a travelling dress.
Notwithstanding our conversation on the preceding day, the consciousness
of having done amiss made me ascribe her departure, or at least the
suddenness of it, to displeasure against me; and, 'soon moved with touch
of blame,' I would not deign to notice the circumstance, but took my
place at the breakfast-table in surly silence. Our meal passed gloomily
enough. I sat trying to convince myself that Miss Mortimer was
unreasonably offended; my father wrinkled his dark brows till his eyes
were scarcely visible; Miss Arnold fidgeted upon her chair; and Miss
Mortimer bent over her untasted chocolate, stealing up her fingers now
and then to arrest the tear ere it reached her cheek.

'Truly, Miss Mortimer,' said my father at last, 'I must say I think it a
little strange that you should leave us so suddenly, before we have had
time to provide a person to be with Ellen.' This speech, or the manner
in which it was spoken, roused Miss Mortimer; for she answered with a
degree of spirit which broke upon the meekness of her usual manner like
summer lightning on the twilight. 'While I had a hope of being useful to
Miss Percy,' said she, 'I was willing to doubt of the necessity for
leaving her; but every such hope must end since it is judged advisable
to use concealment with me. Besides, I am now fully aware of my
situation. Dr ---- has told me that any delay will be fatal to all
chance of success.'

'Well,' said my father, 'every one is the best judge of his own affairs;
but my opinion is that you had better have staid where you are. You
might have had my family surgeon to attend you when you chose, without
expense. I take it your accommodations would have been somewhat
different from what you can have in that confined hovel of yours.'

Miss Mortimer shook her head. 'I cannot doubt your liberality, sir,'
said she; 'but the very name of home compensates many a want; and I find
it is doubly dear to the sick and the dying.'

Miss Mortimer's last words, and the sound of her carriage as it drove to
the door, brought our comfortless meal to a close; and, in a mood
between sorrow and anger, I retreated to a window, where I stood gazing
as steadfastly into the street, as if I had really observed what was
passing there. I did not venture to look round while I listened to Miss
Mortimer's last farewell to my father; and I averted my face still more
when she drew near and took the hand which hung listless by my side.
'Ellen,' said her sweet plaintive voice, 'shall we not part friends?'

I would have given the universe at that moment for the obduracy to utter
a careless answer; but it was impossible:--so I stretched my neck as if
to watch somewhat at the farther end of the street, though in truth my
eyes were dim with tears more bitter than those of sorrow. Miss Mortimer
for a while stood by me silent, and when she spoke, her voice was broken
with emotion. 'Perhaps we may meet again,' whispered she, 'if I live,
perhaps. I know it is in vain to tell you now that you are leaning on a
broken reed; but if it should pierce you--if worldly pleasures fail
you--if you should ever long for the sympathy of a faithful heart, will
you think of me, Ellen? Will you remember your natural, unalienable
right over her whom your mother loved and trusted?'

I answered not. Indeed I could not answer. My father and Miss Arnold
were present; and, in the cowardice of pride, I could not dare the
humiliation of exposing to them the better feeling which swelled my
heart to bursting,--I snatched my hand from the grasp of my friend,--my
only real friend,--darted from her presence, and shut myself up alone.

By mere accident the place of my refuge was my mother's parlour. All was
there as she had left it; for when the other apartments were new
modelled to the fashion of the day, I had rescued hers from change.
There lay the drawing-case where she had sketched flowers for me. There
was the work-box where I had ravelled her silks unchidden. There stood
the footstool on which I used to sit at her feet; and there stood the
couch on which at last the lovely shadow leaned, when she was wasting
away from our sight. 'Oh mother, mother!' I cried aloud; 'mother who
loved me so fondly, who succoured me with thy life! is this my gratitude
for all thy love! Thou hadst one friend, one dear and true to thee; and
I have slighted, abused, driven her from me, sick and dying! Oh why
didst thou cast away thy precious life for such a heartless, thankless
thing as I am!'

My well-deserved self-reproach was interrupted by something that touched
me. It was poor Fido; who, laying his paw upon my knee, looked up in my
face, and gave a short low whine, as if enquiring what ailed me? 'Fido!
poor Fido!' said I, 'what right have I to you?--you should have been
Miss Mortimer's. She would not misuse even a dog of my mother's. Go,
go!' I continued, as the poor creature still fawned on me; 'all kindness
is lost upon _me_. Miss Mortimer better deserves to have the only living
memorial of her friend.'

The parting steps of my neglected monitress now sounded on my ear as she
passed to the carriage; and, catching my little favourite up in my arms,
I sprang towards the door. 'I will bid her keep him for my mother's
sake,' thought I, 'and ask her too, for my mother's sake, to pardon me.'
My hand was on the lock, when I heard Miss Arnold's voice, uttering,
unmoved, a cold parting compliment; and I was not yet sufficiently
humbled to let her witness my humiliation. I did not dare to meet the
stoical scrutiny of her eye, and hastily retreated from the door. After
a moment's hesitation I pulled the bell, and a servant came, 'Take that
dog to Miss Mortimer,' said I, turning away to hide my swollen eyes,
'and tell her I beg as a particular favour that she will carry him away
with her--he has grown intolerably troublesome.' The man stood staring
in inquisitive surprise; for all the household knew that Fido was my
passion. 'Why don't you do as you are desired?' cried I, impatiently.
The servant disappeared with my favourite; I listened till I heard the
carriage drive off; then threw myself on my mother's couch, and wept
bitterly.

But the dispositions which mingled with my sorrow foreboded its
transient duration. My faults stood before me as frightful
apparitions,--objects of terror, not of examination; and I hastened to
shut them from my offended sight. I quickly turned from reproaching my
own persevering rejection of Miss Mortimer's counsels, to blame her
method of counselling. Why would she always take such a timid,
circuitous way of advising me? If she had told me directly that she
suspected Lord Frederick of wishing to entrap me at that odious
masquerade, I was sure that I should have consented to stay at home; and
I repeated to myself again and again, that I was sure I should,--as we
sometimes do in our soliloquies, when we are not quite so sure as we
wish to be.

Glad to turn my thoughts from a channel in which nothing pleasurable was
to be found, I now reverted to the incidents of the former evening. But
there, too, all was comfortless or obscure. The situation in which I had
been surprised by Lady Maria was gall and wormwood to my recollection. I
could neither endure nor forbear to anticipate the form which the
ingenuity of hatred might give to the story of my indiscretion; and,
while I pictured myself already the object of sly sarcasm,--of direct
reproach,--of insulting pity,--every vein throbbed feverishly with proud
impatience of disgrace, and redoubled hatred of my enemy. In the tumult
of my thoughts, a wish crossed my mind, that I had once sheltered myself
from calumny, and inflicted vengeance on my foe, by consenting to
accompany Lord Frederick to Scotland; but this was only the thought of a
moment; and the next I relieved my mind from the crowd of tormenting
images which pressed upon it, by considering whether my lover had really
meditated a bold experiment upon my pliability, or whether my masquerade
friend had been mistaken in his intelligence. Finding myself unable to
solve this question, I went to seek the assistance of Miss Arnold. I was
told she was abroad; and, after wondering a little whither she could
have gone without acquainting me, I ordered the carriage, and went to
escape from my doubts, and from myself, by a consultation with Lady St
Edmunds.

Her Ladyship's servant seemed at first little inclined to admit me; but
observing that a hackney coach moved from the door to let my barouche
draw up, I concluded that my friend was at home, and resolutely made my
way into the house. The servant, seeing me determined, ushered me into a
back drawing-room; where, after waiting some time, I was joined by Lady
St Edmunds. She never received me with more seeming kindness. She
regretted having been detained from me so long; wondered at the
stupidity of her domestics in denying her at any time to me; and thanked
me most cordially for having made good my entrance. In the course of our
conversation, I related, so far as it was known to me, the whole story
of the mask; and ended by asking her opinion of the affair. She listened
to my tale with every appearance of curiosity and interest; and, when I
paused for a reply, declared, without hesitation, that she considered
the whole interference and behaviour of my strange protector as a jest.
I opposed this opinion, and Lady St Edmunds defended it; till I
inadvertently confessed that I had private reasons for believing him to
be perfectly serious. Her Ladyship's countenance now expressed a lively
curiosity, but I was too much ashamed of my 'private reasons' to
acknowledge them; and she was either too polite to urge me, or confident
of gaining the desired information by less direct means.

Finding me assured upon this point, she averred that the information
given by my black domino, if not meant in jest, must at least have
originated in mistake. 'These prying geniuses,' said she, 'will always
find a mystery, or make one. But of this I am sure, Frederick has too
much of your own open undesigning temper to entrap you; even though,'
added she, with a sly smile, 'he were wholly without hopes from
persuasion.' I was defending myself in some confusion from this attack,
when Lady St Edmunds interrupted me by crying out, 'Oh I can guess now
how this mystery of yours has been manufactured! I have this moment
recollected that Frederick intended setting out early this morning for
Lincolnshire. Probably he might go the first stage in the carriage which
took him home from the ball; and your black domino having discovered
this circumstance, has knowingly worked it up into a little romance.'

Glad to escape from the uneasiness of suspicion, and perhaps from the
necessity of increasing my circumspection, I eagerly laid hold on this
explanation, and declared myself perfectly satisfied; but Lady St
Edmunds, who seemed anxious to make my conviction as complete as
possible, insisted on despatching a messenger to enquire into her
nephew's motions.

She left the room for this purpose; and I almost unconsciously began to
turn over some visiting cards which were strewed on her table. One of
them bore Miss Arnold's name, underneath which this sentence was written
in French: 'Admit me for five minutes; I have something particular to
say.' These words were pencilled, and so carelessly, that I was not
absolutely certain of their being Miss Arnold's hand-writing. I was
still examining this point, when Lady St Edmunds returned; and, quite
unsuspectingly, I showed her the card; asking her smiling, 'What was
this deep mystery of Juliet's?'

'That?' said Lady St Edmunds;--'oh, that was--a--let me see--upon my
word, I have forgotten what it was--a consultation about a cap, or a
feather, or some such important affair--I suppose it has lain on that
table these six months.'

'Six months!' repeated I simply. 'I did not know that you had been so
long acquainted.'

'How amusingly precise you are!' cried Lady St Edmunds, laughing. 'I did
not mean to say exactly six times twenty-nine days and six hours, but
merely that the story is so old that I have not the least recollection
of the matter.'

She then immediately changed the subject. With a countenance full of
concern, and with apologies for the liberty she took, she begged that I
would enable her to contradict a malicious tale which, she said, Lady
Maria de Burgh had, after I left the masquerade, half-hinted, half-told,
to almost every member of the company. Ready to weep with vexation, I
was obliged to confess that the tale was not wholly unfounded; and I
related the affair as it had really happened. Lady St Edmunds lifted her
hands and eyes, ejaculating upon the effects of malice and envy in such
a manner, as convinced me that my indiscretion had been dreadfully
aggravated in the narration; but when I pressed to know the particulars,
she drew back, as if unwilling to wound me further, and even affected to
make light of the whole affair. She declared that, being now acquainted
with the truth, she should find it very easy to defend me:--'At all
events,' added she, 'considering the terms on which you and Frederick
stand with each other, nobody, except an old prude or two, will think
the matter worth mentioning.' I was going to protest against this ground
of acquittal, when the servant came to inform his mistress aloud, that
Lord Frederick had set out for Lincolnshire at five o'clock that
morning. This confirmation of Lady St Edmunds' conjecture entirely
removed my suspicions; and convinced me, that my black domino, having
executed his commission with more zeal than discernment, had utterly
mistaken Lord Frederick's intentions.

Some other visiters being now admitted, I left Lady St Edmunds, and
ordered my carriage home, intending to take up Miss Arnold before I
began my usual morning rounds. At the corner of Bond Street, the
overturn of a heavy coal-waggon had occasioned considerable
interruption; and, while one line of carriages passed cautiously on,
another was entirely stopped. My dexterous coachman, experienced in
surmounting that sort of difficulty, contrived to dash into the moving
line. As we slowly passed along, I thought I heard Miss Arnold's voice.
She was urging the driver of a hackney coach to proceed, while he
surlily declared, 'that he would not break his line and have his wheels
torn off to please anybody.' The coach had in its better days been the
property of an acquaintance of mine, whose arms were still blazoned on
the panel; and this circumstance made me distinctly remember, that it
was the same which I had seen that morning at Lady St Edmunds' door.

On observing me, Miss Arnold at first drew back; but presently
afterwards looked out, and nodding familiarly, made a sign for me to
stop and take her into my barouche. I obeyed the signal; but not, I must
own, with the cordial good-will which usually impelled me towards Miss
Arnold. My friend's manner, however, did not partake of the restraint of
mine. To my cold enquiry, 'where she had been,' she answered, with ready
frankness, that she had been looking at spring silks in a shop at the
end of the street. In spite of the manner in which this assertion was
made, I must own that I was not entirely satisfied of its truth. The
incident of the hackney-coach, and the words which I had seen written on
the card, recurring together to my mind, I could not help suspecting
that Miss Arnold had paid Lady St Edmunds a visit which was intended to
be kept secret from me. Already out of humour, and dispirited, I
admitted this suspicion with unwonted readiness; and, after conjecturing
for some moments of surly silence, what could be the motive of this
little circumvention, I bluntly asked my friend, whether she had not
been in Grosvenor Square that morning?

Miss Arnold reddened. 'In Grosvenor Square!' repeated she. 'What should
make you think so?'

'Because the very carriage from which you have just alighted I saw at
Lady St Edmunds' door not half an hour ago.'

'Very likely,' retorted my friend, 'but you did not see me in it, I
suppose.'

I owned that I did not, but mentioned the card, which was connected with
it in my mind; confessing, however, simply enough, that Lady St Edmunds
denied all recollection of it. Miss Arnold now raised her handkerchief
to her eyes. 'Unkind Ellen!' said she, 'what is it you suspect? Why
should I visit Lady St Edmunds without your knowledge? But, since
yesterday, you are entirely changed,--and, after seven years of faithful
friendship----' She stopped, and turned from me as if to weep.

I was uneasy, but not sufficiently so to make concessions. 'If my manner
is altered, Juliet,' said I, 'you well know the cause of the change. Was
it not owing to you that I was so absurdly committed to the malice of
that hateful Lady Maria? And now there is I know not what of mystery in
your proceedings that puts me quite out of patience.'

'Yes, well I know the cause,' answered Miss Arnold, as if still in
tears. 'Your generous nature would never have punished so severely an
error of mere thoughtlessness, if that cruel Miss Mortimer had not
prejudiced you against me. She is gone indeed herself; but she has left
her sting behind. And I must go too!' continued Miss Arnold, sobbing
more violently. 'I could have borne any thing, except to be suspected.'

My ungoverned temper often led me to inflict pain, which, with a
selfishness sometimes miscalled good nature, I could not endure to
witness. Entirely vanquished by the tears of my friend, I locked my arms
round her neck, assured her of my restored confidence; and, as friends
of my sex and age are accustomed to do, offered amends for my transient
estrangement in a manner more natural than wise, by recanting aloud
every suspicion, however momentary, which had formerly crossed my mind.
A person of much less forecast than Miss Arnold might have learned from
this recantation where to place her guards for the future.

My friend heard me to an end, and then with great candour confessed,
what she could not now conceal, that Lord Frederick had her wishes for
his success; but she magnanimously forgave my imagining, even for a
moment, that she could condescend to assist him; and appealed to myself,
what motive she could have for favouring his suit, except the wish of
seeing me rise to a rank worthy of me. She then justified herself from
any clandestine transaction with Lady St Edmunds, giving me some very
unimportant explanation of the card which had perplexed me.

It is so painful to suspect a friend, and I was so accustomed to shun
pain by all possible means, that I willingly suffered myself to be
convinced; and harmony being restored by Miss Arnold's address, we
engaged ourselves in shopping and visiting till it was time to prepare
for the pleasures of the night. My spirits were low, and my head ached
violently; but I had not the fortitude to venture upon a solitary
evening. From the dread of successful malice,--from the recollection of
abused friendship,--in a word, from myself,--I fled, vainly fled, to
the opera, and three parties; from whence I returned home, more languid
and comfortless than ever.

I had just retired to my apartment, when a letter was brought me which
Miss Mortimer had left, with orders that it might be delivered when I
retired for the night. 'Oh mercy!' cried I, 'was I not wretched enough
without this new torment? But give it me. She has some right to make me
miserable.' In this spirit of penance I dismissed my maid, and began to
read my letter, which ran as follows:--

     'When you read this letter, my dear Ellen, one circumstance may
     perhaps assist its influence. My counsels, however received,
     whether used or rejected, are now drawing to a close; and you may
     safely grant them the indulgence we allow to troubles which will
     soon cease to molest us. I know not how far this consideration may
     affect you, but I cannot think of it without strong emotion. I have
     often and deeply regretted that my usefulness to you has been so
     little answerable to my wishes; yet, with the sympathy which rivets
     our eyes on danger which we cannot avert, I would fain have
     lingered with you still; watching, with the same painful
     solicitude, the approach of evils, which I in vain implored you to
     avoid. But it must not be. Aware of my situation, I dare not trifle
     with a life which is not mine to throw away. I must leave you, my
     dearest child, probably for ever. I must loosen this last hold
     which the world has on a heart already severed from all its
     earliest affections. And can I quit you without one last effort for
     your safety;--without once again earnestly striving to rouse your
     watchfulness, ere you have cast away your all for trifles without
     use or value?

     'Ellen, your mother was my first friend. We grew up together. We
     shared in common the sports and the improvements of youth; and
     common sorrows, in maturer life, formed a still stronger bond. Yet
     I know not if my friend herself awakened a tenderness so touching,
     as that which remembrance mingles with my affection for you, when
     your voice or your smile reminds me of what she was in her short
     years of youth and joy. Nor is it only in trifles such as these
     that the resemblance rises to endear you. You have your mother's
     simplicity and truth,--your mother's warm affections,--your
     mother's implicit confidence in the objects of her love. This last
     was indeed the shade, perhaps the only shade of her character. But
     she possessed that "alchemy divine" which could transform even her
     dross into gold; and what might have been her weakness became her
     strength, when she placed her supreme regards upon excellence
     supreme. The nature of your affections also seems to give their
     object, whatever it be, implicit influence with you; and thus it
     becomes doubly important that they be worthily bestowed. It is this
     which has made me watch, with peculiar anxiety, the channels in
     which they seemed inclined to flow; and lament, with peculiar
     bitterness, that a propensity capable of such glorious application
     should be lost, or worse than lost to you.

     'These, however, are subjects upon which you have never permitted
     me to enter. You have repelled them in anger; evaded them in sport;
     or barred them at once as points upon which you were determined to
     act, I must not say to judge, for yourself. If, indeed, you would
     have used your own judgment, one unpleasing part of this letter
     might have been spared; for surely your unbiased judgment might
     show you the danger of some connections into which you have
     entered. It might remind you, that the shafts of calumny are seldom
     so accurately directed, as not to glance aside from their chief
     mark to those who incautiously approach; that those whom it has
     once justly or unjustly suspected, the world views with an eye so
     jaundiced as may discolour even the most innocent action of their
     willing associate. Even upon these grounds I think your judgment,
     had it been consulted, must have given sentence against your
     intimacy with Lady St Edmunds. But these are not all. Persons who
     know her Ladyship better than I pretend to do, represent her as a
     mixture, more common than amiable, of improvidence in the selection
     of her ends, with freedom in the choice, and dexterity in the use
     of the means which she employs; in short (pardon the severity of
     truth), as a mixture of imprudence and artifice. My dearest girl,
     what variety of evil may not result to you from such a connection!
     Whatever may be my suspicions, I am not prepared to assert that
     Lady St Edmunds has any sinister design against you. Your manifest
     indifference towards her nephew makes me feel more security on the
     point where I should otherwise have dreaded her influence the most.
     But I am convinced, that the mere love of manoeuvring becomes in
     itself a sufficient motive for intrigue, and is of itself
     sufficient to endanger the safety of all who venture within its
     sphere. The frank and open usually possess an instinct which,
     independently of caution, repels them from the designing. I must
     not name to you that unhappy trait in your character, by which this
     instinct has been made unavailing to you; by which the artful wind
     themselves into your confidence, and the heartless cheat you of
     your affection. Has not the ceaseless incense which Miss Arnold
     offers blinded you to faults, which far less talent for observation
     than you possess might have exposed to your knowledge and to your
     disdain? Do not throw aside my letter with indignation; but, if the
     words of truth offend you, consider that from me they will wound
     you no more; and pardon me, too, when I confess, that, in despair
     of influencing you upon this point, I have entreated your father
     not to renew his invitation to Miss Arnold, but rather to
     discourage, by every gentle and reasonable means, an intimacy so
     eminently prejudicial to you.

     'And now I think I see you raise your indignant head; and, with the
     lofty scorn of baseness which I have so often seen expressed in
     your countenance and mien, I hear you exclaim, "Shall I desert my
     earliest friend!--repay with cold ingratitude her long-tried,
     ardent attachment?" Your indignation, Ellen, is virtuous, but
     mistaken. If Miss Arnold's attachment be real, she has a claim to
     your gratitude, indeed; but not to your intimacy, your confidence,
     your imitation. These are due to far other qualifications. But are
     you sure, Ellen, that the warm return you make to Miss Arnold's
     supposed affection is itself entirely real? Are you sure, that it
     is not rather the form under which you choose to conceal from
     yourself, that her adulation is become necessary to you? Before you
     indignantly repel this charge, ask your own heart, whether you are,
     in every instance, thus grateful for disinterested love? Is there
     not a friend of whose love you are regardless?--whose counsels you
     neglect?--whose presence you shun?--from whom you withhold your
     trust, though the highest confidence were here the highest
     wisdom?--whom you refuse to imitate, though here the most imperfect
     imitation were glorious? You exchange your affection, and all the
     influence which your affection bestows, for a mere shadow of
     good-will. The very dog that fawns upon you, is caressed with
     childish fondness. Oh, Ellen, does it never strike you with strong
     amazement to reflect, that you are sensible to every love but that
     which is boundless? grateful for every kindness but that which is
     wholly undeserved--wholly beyond return? Is nothing due to an
     unwearied friend? Is it fitting, that one who lives, who enjoys so
     much to sweeten life, by the providence, the bounty, the
     forbearance of a benefactor, should live to herself alone? Yet ask
     your own conscience, what part of your plan of life, or rather,
     since I believe your life is without a plan, which of your habits
     is inspired by gratitude. Dare to be candid with yourself, and
     though the odious word will grate upon your ear, enquire whether
     selfishness be not rather your chosen guide;--whether you be not
     selfish in your pursuit of pleasure;--selfish in your fondness for
     the flatterer who soothes your vanity,--selfish in the profuse
     liberality with which you vainly hope to purchase an affection
     which it is not in her nature to bestow,--selfish even in the
     relief which you indiscriminately lavish on every complainer whose
     cry disturbs you on your bed of roses. Is this the temper of a
     Christian--of one "who is not her own, but is bought with a price?"
     Consider this awful price, and how will your own conduct change in
     your estimation? How will you start as from a fearful dream, when
     you remember, that of this mighty debt you have hitherto lived
     regardless? How will you then abhor that pursuit of selfish
     pleasure which has hitherto alienated your mind from all that best
     deserves your care,--blasted the very sense by which you should
     have perceived the excellence of your benefactor,--diverted your
     regards from the deeper and deeper death which is palsying your
     soul; and closed your ear against the renovating voice which calls
     you to arise and live? This voice, once heard, would exalt your
     confiding temper to the elevations of faith,--ennoble your careless
     generosity to the self-devotion of saints and martyrs,--your warmth
     of affection, now squandered on the meanest of objects, to the love
     of God. The true religion once received, would change the whole
     current of your hopes and fears;--would ennoble your desires,
     subdue passion, humble the proud heart, overcome the world. But you
     will not give her whereon to plant her foot; for where, amidst the
     multitude of your toys, shall religion find a place? Oh, why should
     we, by continual sacrifice, confirm our natural idolatry of created
     things? Why fill, with the veriest baubles of this unsubstantial
     scene, hearts already too much inclined to exclude their rightful
     possessor? The pursuit of selfish pleasure is indeed natural, for
     self is the idol of fallen man; but the great end of his present
     state of being is to prostrate that idol before the Supreme. The
     stony Dagon bows unwillingly, but bow he must. Our heavenly Father,
     though a merciful, is not a fond or partial parent; and the same
     lot is more or less the portion of us all. He has freely given. He
     has done more; he has warned us of the real uses of his gifts.
     Perverse by nature, we abuse his bounty. Again, he exhorts us by
     the ministry of his servants; and often graciously sweetens his
     warnings, by conveying them in the voice of partial friendship, or
     parental love. We reject counsel; and the father unwillingly
     chastises. He withdraws the gifts which we have perverted, or
     suffers them to become themselves the punishment of their own
     abuse. If kindness cannot touch, nor exhortation move, nor warning
     alarm, nor chastisement reclaim, what other means can be employed
     with a moral being: What remains but the fearful sentence, "He is
     joined to his idols; let him alone." Oh, Ellen, my blood freezes at
     the thought that such a sentence may ever go forth against you.
     Rouse you, dear child of my love,--rouse you from your ill-boding
     security. Tremble, lest you already approach that state where mercy
     itself assumes the form of punishment. You have hitherto lived to
     yourself alone. Now venture to examine this god of your
     idolatry;--for the being whose pleasure and whose honour you seek,
     is your god, call it by what name you will. See if it be worthy to
     divide even your least service with Him who, infinite in goodness,
     accepts the imperfect,--showers his bounty on the
     unprofitable,--and opens, even to the rebel, the arms of a
     father!--who meets your offences with undesired pardon, and
     anticipates your wants with offers of himself! Think you that this
     generous love could lay on you a galling yoke? I know that, though
     you should distrust my judgment, you will credit my testimony; and
     I solemnly protest to you, that I have found his service to be
     "perfect freedom." He exalts my joys as gifts of his bounty; He
     blesses my sorrows as tokens of his love; He lightens my duties by
     honouring them, poor as they are, with his acceptance; and even the
     pang with which I feel and own myself a lost sinner is sweetened by
     remembrance of that mercy which came to seek and to save me,
     _because_ I was lost. These are my pleasures; and I know that they
     can counterbalance poverty, and loneliness, and pain. Your
     pleasures too I have tried; and I know them to be cold, fleeting,
     and unsubstantial, as the glories of a winter sky. Oh for the
     eloquence of angels, that I might persuade you to exchange them for
     the real treasure! Yet vain were the eloquence of angels, if the
     "still small voice" be wanting, which alone can speak to the heart.
     I may plead, and testify, and entreat; but is aught else within my
     power?--Yes,--I will go and pray for you.

                                             'E. MORTIMER.'




CHAPTER XI

    _He had the skill, when cunning's gaze would seek
    To probe his heart, and watch his changing cheek,
    At once the observer's purpose to espy,
    And on himself roll back his scrutiny._

                                             Lord Byron.


My friend's letter cost me a whole night's repose. I could not read
without emotion the expressions of an affection so ill repaid,--an
affection now lost to me for ever. A thousand instances of my
ingratitude forced themselves upon my recollection; and who can tell the
bitterness of that pity which we feel for those whom we have injured,
when we know that our pity can no longer avail? The mild form of Miss
Mortimer perpetually rose to my fancy. I saw her alone in her solitary
dwelling, suffering pain which was unsoothed by the voice of sympathy,
and weakness which no friend was at hand to sustain. I saw her weep over
the wounds of my unkindness, and bless me, though 'the iron had entered
into her soul!'--'But she shall not weep,--she shall not be alone and
comfortless,' I cried, starting like one who has taken a sudden
resolution: 'I will go to her. I will show her, that I am not altogether
thankless. I will spend whole days with her. I will read to her,--sing
to her,--amuse her a thousand ways. To-morrow I will go--no--to-morrow I
am engaged at Lady G.'s,--how provoking! and the day after, we must dine
with Mrs Sidney,--was ever any thing so unfortunate? However, some day
soon I will most certainly go.' So with this opiate I lulled the most
painful of my self-upbraidings.

That part of the letter which related to my chosen associates, was not
immediately dismissed from my mind. Had no accident awakened my
suspicions, I should have indignantly rejected my friend's insinuations,
or despised them as the sentiments of a narrow-minded though
well-intentioned person; but now, my own observation coming in aid of
her remonstrances, I was obliged to own that they were not wholly
unfounded. I received them, however, as a _bon vivant_ does the advice
of his physician. He is told that temperance is necessary; and he
assents, reserving the liberty of explaining the term. I was convinced
that it was advisable to restrain my intimacy with Lady St Edmunds; I
resolved to be less frank in communicating my sentiments, less open in
regard to my affairs; and this resolution held, till the next time it
was exposed to the blandishments of Lady St Edmunds. As to Miss Arnold,
her faults, like my own, I could review only to excuse them; or rather,
they entered my mind only to be banished by some affectionate
recollection. Whatever has long ministered to our gratification, is at
last valued without reference to its worth; and thus I valued Juliet.
Nay, perhaps my perverted heart loved her the more for her deficiency in
virtues, which must have oppressed me with a painful sense of
inferiority. In short, 'I could have better spared a better' person.
But, amidst my present 'compunctious visitings,' I thought of atoning
for my former rebellions by one heroic act of submission. I resolved
that, in compliance with Miss Mortimer's advice, I would refrain from
urging my father to detain Miss Arnold as an inmate of the family. I
was, however, spared this effort of self-command. The termination of
Miss Arnold's visit was never again mentioned, either by herself, or by
my father. In fact, she had become almost as necessary to him as to me;
and I have reason to believe, that he was very little pleased with Miss
Mortimer's interference on the subject.

But the more serious part of my friend's letter was that which
disquieted me the most. The darkness of midnight was around me. The
glittering baubles which dazzled me withdrawn for a time, I saw, not
without alarm, the great realities which she presented to my mind. I
could not disguise from myself the uselessness of my past life; and I
shrunk under a confused dread of vengeance. In the silence, in the
loneliness of night,--without defence against that awful voice which I
had so often refused to hear,--I trembled, as conscience loudly
reproached me with the bounties of my benefactor, and the ingratitude
with which they were repaid. A sense of unworthiness wrung from me some
natural tears of remorse; a sense of danger produced some vague desires
of reformation; and this, I fancied, was repentance. How many useless
or poisonous nostrums of our own compounding do we call by the name of
the true restorative!

But though false medicines may assume the appellation, and sometimes
even the semblance of the real, they cannot counterfeit its effects. The
cures which they perform are at best partial or transient,--the true
medicine alone gives permanent and universal health. I passed the night
under the scourge of conscience; and the strokes were repeated, though
at lengthening intervals, for several days. I was resolved, that I would
no longer be an unprofitable servant; that I would devote part of my
time and my fortune to the service of the Giver; that I would earn the
gratitude of the poor,--the applauses of my own conscience,--the
approbation of Heaven! Of the permanence of my resolutions,--of my own
ability to put them in practice,--it never entered my imagination to
doubt. I remembered having heard my duties summed up in three
comprehensive epithets, 'sober, righteous, and godly.' To be 'righteous'
was, I thought, an injunction chiefly adapted to the poor. In the
limited sense which I affixed to the command, the rich had no temptation
to break it; at all events I did not,--for I defrauded no one. 'Godly' I
certainly intended one day or other to become; but for the present I
deferred fixing upon the particulars of this change. It was better not
to attempt too much at once,--so I determined to begin by living
'soberly.' I would withdraw a little from the gay world in which I had
of late been so busy. I would pass more of my time at home. I would find
out some poor but amiable family, who had perhaps seen better days. I
would assist and comfort them; and, confining myself to a simple
neatness in my dress, would expend upon them the liberal allowance of my
indulgent father. I was presently transported by fancy to a scene of
elegant distress, and theatrical gratitude, common enough in her airy
regions, but exceedingly scarce upon the face of this vulgar earth. The
idea was delightful. 'Who,' cried I, 'would forfeit the pleasures of
benevolence for toys which nature and good sense can so well dispense
with? And, after all, what shall I lose by retreating a little from a
world where envy and malice are watchful to distort the veriest
casualties into the hideous forms upon which slander loves to scowl! No
doubt, Lady Maria's malice will find food in my new way of life,--but no
matter, I will despise it.' It is so easy to despise malice in our
closets! 'Mr Maitland,' thought I, 'will approve of my altered conduct;'
and then I considered that retirement would allow me to make
observations on the 'interest' which I had excited in Mr Maitland; for,
in the present sobered state of my mind, I thought of making
observations, rather than experiments.

Circumstances occurred to quicken the ardour with which vanity pursued
those observations. Maitland had hitherto been content to perform the
duties of a quiet citizen. Secure of respect, and careless of
admiration, he had been satisfied to promote by conscientious industry
his means of usefulness, and, with conscientious benevolence, to devote
those means to their proper end. With characteristic reserve, he had
withdrawn even from the gratitude of mankind. He had been the unknown,
though liberal benefactor of unfriended genius. He had given liberty to
the debtor who scarcely knew of his existence; and had cheered many a
heart which throbbed not at the name of Maitland. But now the name of
Maitland became the theme of every tongue; for, in the cause of justice,
he had put forth the powers of his manly mind; and orators, such as our
senates must hope no more to own, had hung with warm applause, or with
silent rapture, upon the eloquence of Maitland! Himself a West India
merchant, and interested, of course, in the continuation of the
slave-trade, he opposed, with all the zeal of honour and humanity, this
vilest traffic that ever degraded the name and the character of man. In
the senate of his country he lifted up his testimony against this foul
blot upon her fame,--this tiger-outrage upon fellow-man,--this daring
violation of the image of God. Alas! that a more lasting page than mine
must record, that the cry of the oppressed often came up before British
senates, ere they would deign to hear! But, amidst the tergiversation of
friends, and the virulence of foes, some still maintained the cause of
justice. They poured forth the eloquence which makes the wicked tremble,
and the good man exult in the strength of virtue. The base ear of
interest refused indeed to hear; but the words of truth were not
scattered to the winds. All England, all Europe, caught the inspiration;
and burnt with an ardour which reason and humanity had failed to kindle,
till they borrowed the eloquence of Maitland.

And now his praise burst upon me from every quarter. Those who affected
intimacy with the great, retailed it as the private sentiment of
ministers and princes. Our political augurs foretold his rise to the
highest dignities of the state. Those who love to give advice were eager
that he should forsake his humbler profession, and devote his
extraordinary talents to the good of his country. The newspapers
panegyrised him; and fashion, rank, and beauty, crowded round the happy
few who could give information concerning the age, manners, and
appearance of Mr Maitland. Not all his wisdom, nor all his worth, could
ever have moved my vain mind so much as did these tributes of applause,
from persons unqualified to estimate either. When I heard admiration
dwell upon his name, my heart bounded at the recollection of the
'interest' which he had expressed in me; and again I wondered whether
that interest were love? I would have given a universe to be able to
answer 'yes.' To see the eye which could penetrate the soul hang captive
on a glance of mine!--to hear the voice which could awe a senate falter
when it spoke to me!--to feel the hand which was judged worthy to hold
the helm of state tremble at my touch!--the very thought was
inspiration. Let not the forgiving smile which belongs to the innocent
weakness of nature be lavished on a vice which leads to such cold, such
heartless selfishness. Let it rather be remembered that avarice,
oppression, cruelty, all the iron vices which harden the heart of man,
are not more rigidly selfish, more wantonly regardless of another's
feelings, than unrestrained, active vanity.

Meanwhile, Mr Maitland allowed me abundant opportunities for
observation. Instead of withdrawing from us after Miss Mortimer's
departure, as I feared he would, he visited us more frequently than
ever. He sometimes breakfasted with us in his way to the city; often
returned when the House adjourned in the evening; and in short seemed
inclined to spend with us the greater part of his few abstemious hours
of leisure. Yet even my vanity could trace nothing in his behaviour
which might explain this constant attendance. On the contrary, his
manner, often cold, was sometimes even severe. He was naturally far from
being morose; and often casting off the cares of business, he would
catch infectious spirits from my lightness of heart; yet even in those
moments, somewhat painful would not unfrequently appear to cross his
mind, and he would turn from me as if half in sorrow, half in anger. I
could perceive that he listened with interest when I spoke; but that
interest seemed of no pleasing kind. He often, indeed, looked amused,
but seldom approving; and if once or twice I caught a more tender
glance, it was one of such mournful kindness as less resembled love than
compassion.

All this was provokingly unsatisfactory. I found that it was vain to
expect discoveries from observation; I was obliged to have recourse to
experiment; and it is not to be imagined what tricks I practised to
steal poor Maitland's fancied secret. So mean is vanity! and so little
security have they who submit to its power, that they may not stoop to
faults the most remote from their natural tendencies. I flourished the
arm of which he had praised the beauty, that I might watch whether his
gaze followed it in admiration. I was laboriously 'graceful;' and
sported my '_naif_ sensibility' till it was any thing but _naif_. I
obtruded my 'lovely singleness of mind,' till, I believe, I should have
become a disgusting mass of affectation, had it not been for the manly
plainness of Mr Maitland. He at first appeared to look with surprise
upon my altered demeanour; then fairly showed me by his manner that he
detected my little arts, and that he was alternately grieved to find me
condescending to plot, and angry that I could plot no better. 'That
certainly is the finest arm in England,' whispered he one evening when I
had been leaning upon it, exactly opposite to him, for five minutes, 'so
now you may put on your glove. Nay, instead of frowning, you should
thank me for that blush; for though pride and anger may have some share
in it, it is not unbecoming, since it is natural.' I was sullen for a
little, and muttered something about 'impertinence,'--but I never
flourished my arm again.

'Lady Maria de Burgh is certainly the most beautiful girl in London,'
said I to Miss Arnold one day when the subject was in debate. This was a
fit of artificial candour; for I had observed, that Maitland detested
all symptoms of animosity; and I appealed to him, in hopes that he would
at least except me from his affirmative. 'Yes,' returned he, directing,
by one flash of his eloquent eye, the warning distinctly to me, 'Yes;
but she reminds me of the dog in the fable. Nature has given her beauty
enough; but she grasps at more, and thus loses all.'

Affectation seemed likely to be as unavailing as watchfulness; yet, the
longer my search lasted, the more eager it became. Whatever occupied
attention long, will occupy it much; and, in my vain investigation, I
often endured the anxiety of the philosopher, who, having sailed to the
antipodes to observe the transit of Venus, saw, at the critical hour, a
cloud rise to obstruct his observations. 'How shall I fathom the heart
of that impenetrable being?' exclaimed I to my confidante one day, when,
in pursuance of my new plan of soberness and charity, I sat learning to
knit a child's stocking at the rate of a row in the hour.

'Bless me, Ellen,' returned Miss Arnold, 'what signifies the heart of a
musty old bachelor?'

'I don't know what you call old, Juliet; but, in my opinion, I should
be more than woman, or less, if I could suspect my power over such a man
as Maitland, and not wish to ascertain the point.'

'I do not believe,' returned Juliet, 'that any woman upon earth has
power over him,--a cold, cynical, sarcastic----'

'You forget,' interrupted I, 'that he has owned a strong interest in
me;' for, in the soft hour of returning confidence, I had showed his
billet to my friend.

'Yes,' answered Miss Arnold, 'that is true; but don't you think he may
once have been a lover of your mother's, and that on her account----'

'My mother's!' cried I. 'Ridiculous! impossible! Maitland must have been
a mere child when my mother married.'

'Let me see,' said Miss Arnold, with calculating brow, 'your mother, had
she been alive, would now have been near forty.'

'And Maitland, I am sure, cannot be more than two-and-thirty.'

'Is he not?' said Miss Arnold, who had ventured as far as she thought
prudent. Silence ensued; for I was now in no very complacent frame. Miss
Arnold was the first to speak. 'Perhaps,' said she, 'Mr Maitland only
wishes to conceal his own sentiments, till he makes sure of
yours,--perhaps he would be secure of success before he condescends to
sue.'

'If I thought the man were such a coxcomb,' cried I, 'I would have no
mercy in tormenting. I detest pride.'

'If I have guessed right,' pursued Miss Arnold, 'a little fit of
jealousy would do excellently well to prove him, and punish him at the
same time; I am sure he deserves it very well, for making so much
mystery of nothing.' A by-stander might have indulged a melancholy smile
at my detestation of pride, and Miss Arnold's antipathy to mystery. But
our abhorrence of evil is never more vehemently, perhaps never more
sincerely expressed, than when our own besetting sin thwarts us in the
conduct of others.

'But,' said I, for experience had begun to teach me some awe for
Maitland's penetration, 'what if he should see through our design, and
only laugh at us and our manoeuvring?'

'Oh! as for that,' returned Juliet, 'choose his rival well, and there is
no sort of danger. A dull, every-day creature, to be sure, would never
do: but fix upon something handsome, lively, fashionable, and it must
appear the most natural thing in the world. By the by, did he ever seem
to suspect any one in particular?'

'What! don't you remember that, in his note, he speaks with tolerably
decent alarm of Lord Frederick?'

'Oh! true,' returned Miss Arnold, 'I had forgotten.--Well, do you think
you could pitch upon a better flirt?'

Now my friend knew that I happened at that moment to have no choice of
flirts; for, besides that Lord Frederick was the only dangler whom I had
ever systematically encouraged, he was the only one of my present
admirers who could boast any particular advantages of figure or
situation. 'He might answer the purpose well enough,' returned I, 'if we
knew how to bring Maitland and him together; but you know he does not
visit here since his foolish old father thought fit to interfere.'

'That may be easily managed,' replied Juliet. 'The slightest hint from
you would bring him back.'

I had once determined to listen with caution to Miss Arnold's advice,
where Lord Frederick was concerned; but now her advice favoured my
inclination; and that which ought to have made me doubly suspicious of
her counsels, was the cause why I followed them without hesitation. The
hint to Lord Frederick was given at the first opportunity, and proved as
effectual as its instigator had foretold. Still, however, some
contrivance was necessary to bring the rivals together; for the man of
fashion and the man of business seldom paid their visits at the same
hour. At length I effected an interview; and never was visiter more
partially distinguished than Lord Frederick. We placed ourselves
together upon a sofa, apart from the rest of the company, and forthwith
entered upon all the evolutions of flirtation; for I whispered without a
secret, laughed without a joke, frowned without anger, and talked
without discretion.

It was Miss Arnold's allotted province to watch the effect of these
fooleries upon Maitland; but I could not refrain from sharing her task,
by stealing at times a glance towards him. These glances animated my
exertions; for I was almost sure that he looked disturbed; and fancied,
more than once, that I saw his colour change. But if he was uneasy at
witnessing Lord Frederick's success, he did not long subject himself to
the pain; for, after having endured my folly for a quarter of an hour,
without offering it the least interruption, he took a very frozen leave,
and departed. I laughed at his coldness; convinced, as I now was, that
it was only the pettishness of jealousy. Miss Arnold, however, gently
insinuated a contrary opinion. 'She might, indeed, be mistaken, she
could not pretend to my talent for piercing disguise; but she must
confess, that Maitland had succeeded in concealing from her every trace
of emotion.' It may easily be imagined, that this opinion, however
seasoned with flattery, and however cautiously expressed, was not very
agreeable to me. To dispel my friend's doubts, rather than my own, I
proposed a second trial; but some time elapsed before that trial could
be made. In the mean while, Lord Frederick failed not to profit by his
recent admission. His visits even became so frequent, that, dreading an
altercation with my father, I began to wish that I had been more guarded
in my invitation.

But, this did not prevent me from re-acting my coquetry the next time
that the supposed rivals met in my presence. After this second
interview, Miss Arnold, though with great deference, persisted in her
former sentence; and I was unwillingly obliged to soften somewhat the
vehemence of my dissent; for if Maitland was wounded by my preference of
Lord Frederick, he certainly endured the smart with Spartan fortitude. I
was somewhat disconcerted; and should have laid aside all my vain
surmises, had not the recollection of Maitland's note constantly
returned to strengthen them.

Our experiments, however, were brought to a close by a disclosure of my
father's. 'Miss Percy,' said he one day, taking his posture of
exhortation, 'I think Lord Frederick de Burgh seems to wait upon you
every day. Now, after what has passed, this is indiscreet; and,
therefore, it is my desire that you give him no encouragement to
frequent my house. I would have put a stop to the thing at once, but I
can perceive that you don't care for the puppy; and Maitland, who is a
very sharp fellow, makes the very same observation.'

Now, I knew that this was Mr Percy's method of adopting the stray
remarks which he judged worthy to be fathered by himself; and I fully
understood, that all my laboured favour to Lord Frederick had failed to
impose upon Maitland. What could be more vexatious? I had no resource,
however; except, like the fox in the fable, to despise what was
unattainable. I vowed that I would concern myself no more with a person
who was too wise to have the common feelings of humanity. I assured my
confidante that his sentiments were a matter of perfect indifference to
me. I hope, for my conscience' sake, that this was true, for I repeated
it at least ten times every day.

Meanwhile, in the ardour of my investigation, I had, from time to time,
deferred my purposed visit to Miss Mortimer. My heart had not failed to
reproach me with this delay; but I had constantly soothed it with
promises for to-morrow,--to-morrow, that word of evil omen to all
purposes of reformation! At last, however, I was resolved to repair my
neglect; for the day after Maitland's quick-sightedness happened to be
Sunday; and how could the Sabbath be better employed than in a necessary
and pious work? It is no new thing to see that day burdened with the
necessity of works which might as well have belonged to any other.
Instead, therefore, of going to hear a fashionable preacher, I ordered
my carriage to ----.




CHAPTER XII

                  _----Oh my fate!
    That never would consent that I should see
    How worthy thou wert both of love and duty,
    Before I lost you;----_

    _With justice, therefore, you may cut me off,
    And from your memory wash the remembrance
    That e'er I was; like to some vicious purpose,
    Which in your better judgment you repent of,
    And study to forget._

                                             Massinger.


The morning shone bright with a summer sun. The trees, though now rich
in foliage, were still varied with the fresh hues of spring. The river
flashed gaily in the sun beam; or rolled foaming from the prows of
stately vessels, which now veered as in conscious grace, now moved
onward as in power without effort, bearing wealth and plenty from
distant lands. What heart, that is not chilled by misery, or hardened by
guilt, is insensible to the charms of renovated nature! What human heart
exults not in the tokens of human power! Mine rejoiced in the splendid
scene before me; but it was the rejoicing of the proud, always akin to
boasting. 'How richly,' I exclaimed, 'has the Creator adorned this fair
dwelling of his children! A glorious dwelling, worthy of the noble
creatures for whom it was designed;--creatures whose courage braves the
mighty ocean,--whose power compels the service of the elements,--whose
wisdom scales the heavens, and unlocks the springs of a moving universe!
And can there be zealots whose gloomy souls behold in this magnificent
frame of things, only the scene of a dull and toilsome pilgrimage, for
beings wayworn, guilty, wretched?'

In these thoughts, and others of like reasonableness and humility, I
reached the dwelling of my friend. It was a low thatched cottage,
standing somewhat apart from a few scattered dwellings, which scarcely
deserved the name of a village. I had seen it in my childhood, when a
holiday had dismissed me from confinement; and it was associated in my
mind with images of gaiety and freedom. Alas! those images but ill
accorded with its present aspect. It looked deserted and forlorn. She,
by whose taste it had been adorned, was now a prisoner within its walls.
The flowers which she had planted were blooming in confused luxuriance.
The rose-tree, which she had taught to climb the latticed porch, now
half-impeded entrance, and the jessamine which she had twined round her
casement, now threw back its dishevelled sprays as if to shade her
death-bed. The carriage stopped at the wicket of the neglected garden;
and I, my lofty thoughts somewhat quelled by the desolateness of the
scene, passed thoughtfully towards the cottage, along a walk once kept
with a neatness the most precise, now faintly marked with a narrow track
which alone repressed the disorderly vegetation.

The door was opened for me by Miss Mortimer's only domestic; a grave and
reverend-looking person, with silver grey hair, combed smooth under a
neat crimped coif, and with a starched white handkerchief crossed
decently upon her breast. Nor were her manners less a contrast to those
of the flippant gentlewomen to whose attendance I was accustomed. With
abundance of ceremony, she ushered me up stairs; then passing me with a
low courtesy, and a few words of respectful apology, she went before me
into her mistress's apartment, and announced my arrival in terms in
which the familiar kindness of a friend blended oddly with the reverence
of an inferior. Miss Mortimer, with an exclamation of joy, stretched her
arms fondly towards me. Prepared as I was for an alteration in her
appearance, I was shocked at the change which a few weeks had effected.
A faint glow flushed her face for a moment, and vanished. Her eyes, that
were wont to beam with such dove-like softness, now shed an ominous
brilliance. The hand which she extended towards me, scarcely seemed to
exclude the light, and every little vein was perceptible in its sickly
transparency. Yet her wasted countenance retained its serenity; and her
feeble voice still spoke the accents of cheerfulness. 'My dearest
Ellen,' said she, 'this is so kind! And yet I expected it too! I knew
you would come.'

Blushing at praise which my tardy kindness had so ill deserved, I
hastily enquired concerning her health. 'I believe,' said she smiling,
though she sighed too, 'that I am still to cumber the ground a little
longer. I am told that my immediate danger is past.'

'Heavens be praised,' cried I, with fervent sincerity.

'God's will be done,' said Miss Mortimer: 'I once seemed so near my
haven! I little thought to be cast back upon the stormy ocean; but,
God's will be done.'

'Nay, call it not the stormy ocean,' said I. 'Say rather, upon a
cheerful stream, where you and I shall glide peacefully on together. You
will soon be able to come to us at Richmond; and then I will show you
all the affection and all the respect which----' 'I ought always to have
shown,' were the words which rose to my lips; but pride stifled the
accents of confession. 'Were you once able,' continued I, 'to taste the
blessed air that stirs all living things so joyously to-day, and see how
all earth and heaven are gladdened with this glorious sunshine, you
would gain new life and vigour every moment.'

'Ay, he is shining brightly,' said Miss Mortimer, looking towards her
darkened casement. 'And a better sun, too, is gladdening all earth and
heaven; but I, confined in a low cottage, see only the faint reflection
of his brightness. But I know that He is shining gloriously,' continued
she, the flush of rapture mounting to her face, 'and I shall yet see Him
and rejoice!'

I made no reply. 'It is fortunate,' thought I, 'that they who have no
pleasure in this life can solace themselves with the prospect of
another.' Little did I at that moment imagine, that I myself was
destined to furnish proof, that the loss of all worldly comfort cannot
of itself procure this solace; that the ruin of all our earthly
prospects cannot of itself elevate the hope long used to grovel among
earthly things.

I spent almost two hours with my friend; during which, though so weak
that the slightest exertions seemed oppressive to her, she at intervals
conversed cheerfully. She enquired with friendly interest into my
employments and recreations; but she knew me too well to hazard more
direct interrogation concerning the effect of her monitory letter. In
the course of our conversation, she asked, whether I often saw Mr
Maitland? The question was a very simple one; but my roused watchfulness
upon that subject made me fancy something particular in her manner of
asking it. It had occurred to me, that she might possibly be able to
solve the difficulty which had of late so much perplexed me; but I could
not prevail upon myself to state the case directly. 'I wonder,' said I,
'now that you are gone, what can induce Maitland to visit us so often?'
I thought there was meaning in Miss Mortimer's smile; but her reply was
prevented by the entrance of the maid with refreshments. I wished
Barbara a thousand miles off with her tray, though it contained rich
wines, and some of the most costly fruits of the season. Miss Mortimer
pressed me to partake of them, telling me, that she was regularly and
profusely supplied. 'The giver,' said she, 'withholds nothing except his
name, and that, too, I believe I can guess.'

A gentle knock at the house-door now drew Barbara from the room, and I
instantly began to contrive how I might revert to the subject of my
curiosity. 'Could you have imagined,' said I, 'that my father was the
kind of man likely to attract Maitland so much?'

My enemy again made her appearance. 'Mr Maitland is below, madam,' said
she: 'I asked him in, because I thought you would not turn his worthy
worship away the third time he is come to ask for you.'

'Well, Ellen,' said Miss Mortimer, smiling, 'as your presence may
protect my character, I think I may see him to-day.'

As Mr Maitland entered the room, I saw my friend make a feeble effort to
rise from her seat; and, bending towards her, I supported her in my
arms. The moment Maitland's eye fell upon me, it lightened with
satisfaction. After speaking to my friend he turned to me. 'Miss Percy!'
said he; and he said no more; but I would not have exchanged these words
and the look which accompanied them for all the compliments of all
mankind. Yet at that moment the spirit of coquetry slept; I quite forgot
to calculate upon his love, and thought only of his approbation.

I believe neither Maitland nor I recollected that he still held the hand
he had taken, till Miss Mortimer offered him some fruit, hinting that
she suspected him of having a peculiar right to it. A slight change of
colour betrayed him; but he only answered carelessly, that fruit came
seasonably after a walk of seven miles in a sultry day. 'You never
travel otherwise than on foot on Sunday,' said Miss Mortimer. 'I seldom
find occasion to travel on Sunday at all,' answered Maitland; 'but I
knew that I could spend an hour with you without violating the spirit of
the fourth commandment.'

The hour was spent, and spent without weariness even to me; yet I cannot
recollect that a single sentence was uttered in reference to worldly
business or amusement; except that Maitland once bitterly lamented his
disappointed hopes of usefulness to the African cause. 'However,' added
he, 'I believe I had need of that lesson. Our Master is the only one
whose servants venture to be displeased if they may not direct what
service he will accept from them.'

'Nobody is more in want of such a lesson than I,' said Miss Mortimer,
'when my foolish heart is tempted to repine at the prospect of being
thus laid aside, perhaps for years; useless as it should seem to myself
and to all human kind.'

'My good friend,' returned Maitland (and a tear for a moment quenched
the lightning of that eye before which the most untameable spirit must
have bowed submissive), 'say not that you are useless, while you can
show forth the praise of your Creator. His goodness shines gloriously
when he bestows and blesses the gifts of nature and of fortune; but more
gloriously when his mercy gladdens life after all these gifts are
withdrawn. It is the high privilege of your condition to prove that our
Father is of himself alone sufficient for the happiness of his
children.'

'I am sure, my friend,' cried I, 'of all people upon earth, you need the
least regret being made idle for a little while; for the recollection of
the good which you have already done must furnish your mind with a
continual feast.'

'Indeed, Ellen,' returned Miss Mortimer, 'you never were more mistaken.
I do not recollect one action of my life, not even among those which
originated in a sense of duty, that has not been degraded by some
mixture of evil, either in the motive or in the performance.'

'Oh but you know perfection is not expected from us.'

Maitland shook his head. 'I fear,' said he, 'we must not trust much to
your plea, so long as we are commanded to "be perfect." Miss Mortimer
will feel at peace; not because she hopes that her King will, instead of
her just tribute, accept of counters; but because she knows that the
full tribute has been paid.'

While I saw the truths of religion affect the vigorous mind of
Maitland,--while I saw them triumph in a feebler soul over pain, and
loneliness, and fear,--how could I remain wholly insensible to their
power? Whilst I listened to the conversation of these Christians, how
could I suppress a wish that their comforts might one day be mine? 'Pray
for me,' I whispered to Miss Mortimer, half-desirous, half-afraid to
extend my petition to Maitland, 'pray for me that, when I am sick and
dying, your God may bless me as he now blesses you.' I know not how my
friend replied; for Maitland laid his hand upon my head, with a look in
which all kind and holy feeling was so blended, that raptured saints can
image nothing more seraphic. He spoke not--but the language of man is
feeble to the eloquence of that pause!

But my mind was as yet unfit to retain any serious impression. The voice
of truth played over it as the breeze upon the unstable waters, moving
it gently for a moment, and then passing away. My religious humour
vanished with the scene by which it was excited; and even Miss
Mortimer's parting whisper helped to replace it by a far different
spirit. 'I can guess now,' said she, 'what carries Mr Maitland so often
to Bloomsbury Square.' Before hearing this remark, I had offered to
convey Maitland to town in my carriage; and now the heart which had so
lately swelled with better feelings, beat with a little coquettish
fluttering, when, having taken leave of my friend, I found myself seated
_tête-à-tête_ with my supposed admirer. Maitland was, however, the very
innocent cause of my flutterings; since for a whole mile he talked of
Miss Mortimer, and nothing but Miss Mortimer; then, perceiving that I
was little inclined to answer, he was silent, and left me to my
reflections.

The softness of evening was beginning to mingle with the cheerfulness of
day, and a fresher breeze began to lighten the sultry air. 'What an
Arcadian day!' cried I. 'Pity that you and I were not lovers, to enjoy
it thus alone together!'

I meant to utter this with the prettiest air of simplicity imaginable,
but found it quite impossible to suppress the conscious glow that stole
over my face. I was certain that Maitland coloured too, though he
answered with great self-possession. 'I make no pretensions to the
character of a lover,' said he; 'but you may allow me to converse with
you like a friend, which will do as well.'

'Oh the very worst substitute in nature,' cried I; 'for the conversation
of lovers is all complaisance; whereas I find that those who beg leave
to talk like friends always mean to ask something which I do not wish to
tell, or to tell something which I do not wish to hear.'

'Perhaps I may mean to do both,' said Maitland; 'for there is a question
which I have often wished to ask you; and when you have answered, I may
perhaps undertake the other office too. Are you aware that common report
joins your name with that of Lord Frederick de Burgh?'

'Stop!' cried I; 'positively you must not be my confessor.'

'That must be as you please,' returned Maitland. 'Then I will in charity
suppose you ignorant; and when I tell you that every gossip's tongue is
busy with his good fortune, I think you will grant him no additional
triumph; unless indeed it be possible that----' He paused, and then
added with unusual warmth,--'but I will not think of such profanation,
much less utter it.'

'Now, do Mr Maitland desist, I entreat you,' cried I, half-smiling, half
in earnest; 'for I never was lectured in my life without being guilty of
some impertinence; and there is nobody living whom I would not rather
offend than you.'

'I believe I must venture,' returned Maitland, looking at me with a
good-humoured smile. 'I would hazard much for your advantage.'

'Nay, positively you shall not,' said I, playfully laying my hand upon
his mouth.

This gesture, which, I protest, originated in mere thoughtlessness,
ended in utter confusion; for Maitland, seizing my hand, pressed it to
his lips. The whole affair was transacted in far less time than I can
tell it; and we both sat looking, I believe, abundantly silly; though
neither, I fancy, had the courage to take a view of the other.

The silence was first broken by a splenetic ejaculation from Maitland.
'Pshaw,' said he, 'you will compel me to act the puppy in spite of
myself.' Now, whatever colour Maitland might try to throw upon his
inadvertence, I plainly perceived that it had not originated in a cool
sense of the duty of gallantry; for he was even studiously inattentive
to all the common gallantries which I was accustomed to expect from
others. My breast swelled with the pride of victory; and yet my
situation was embarrassing enough; for Maitland, far from confirming my
dreams of conquest, much more from empowering me to pursue my triumph,
maintained a frozen silence, and seemed wrapt in a very unlover-like
meditation.

The first words which he uttered were these: 'Although Parliament
refuses justice to these Africans, much might be done for those already
in slavery. Much might be done by a person residing among them,
determined to own no interest but their welfare.' I could not at that
time follow the chain which had led to this idea. Unfortunately for me,
I was soon enabled to trace the connection.

As soon as we entered the town, Maitland expressed a wish to alight, and
immediately took a cold and formal leave. I returned home, with every
thought full of my new discovery, every affection absorbed in vanity.
Convinced of Maitland's attachment, I now only wondered why it was not
avowed. The most probable conjecture I could form was, that he wished to
save his pride the pain of a repulse; and again I piously resolved to
spare no torture within my power. I was determined that, cost what it
would, the secret should be explicitly told; after which I should, of
course, be entitled to exhibit and sport with my captive at pleasure.
Beyond this mean and silly triumph I looked not. I forgot that the lion,
even when tamed, will not learn the tricks of a monkey. Weaker souls, I
knew, might be led contented in their silken fetters: I forgot that the
strongest cords bound Samson only whilst he slept. To reward the
expected patience of my lover was not in all my thoughts. I should as
soon have dreamt of marrying my father.

Meanwhile Maitland was in no haste to renew my opportunities of
coquetting. Business, or, as I then thought, the fear of committing
himself, kept him a whole week from visiting us. During that week, I had
canvassed the subject with Miss Arnold under every possible aspect,
except those in which it would have appeared to a rational mind. I
believe my friend began to be, as perhaps the reader is, heartily tired
of my confidence. She certainly wished the occasion of our discussion at
an end; but she had no desire that it should end favourably to my
wishes. She dreaded the increase of Maitland's influence. A mutual
dislike, indeed, subsisted between them. He seemed to have an intuitive
perception of the dark side of her character; and she to feel a
revolting awe of his undeceiving, undeceivable sagacity. I have often
seen the artful, though they despise defenceless simplicity, and delight
to exert their skill against weapons like their own, yet shrink with
instinctive dread from plain, undesigning common sense. Maitland's
presence always imposed a visible restraint upon Miss Arnold; but she
had more cogent reasons than her dislike of Maitland, for wishing to
arrest the progress of an intercourse which threatened to baffle certain
schemes of her own. Meaning to interrupt our good understanding, she
gave me the advice which appeared most likely to effect her purpose. Of
this I have now no doubt; though, at that time, I harboured not a
suspicion of any motive less friendly than a desire to forward every
purpose of mine.

'If you don't flirt more sentimentally,' said she, 'you will never make
any impression upon Maitland. He knows you would never rattle away as
you do to De Burgh, with any man you really cared for. You should
endeavour to seem in earnest.'

'Oh, I am quite tired of endeavouring to "seem." And then I really can't
be sentimental: it is not in my nature. Besides, it would be all in
vain. Maitland has found out that I am not in love with Lord Frederick;
and it will be impossible to convince him of the contrary.'

'No matter; you may make him believe that you are somehow bound in
honour to Lord Frederick, which will quite answer the purpose.'

'No Juliet; that I cannot possibly do, without downright falsehood.'

'Oh, I'll engage to make him believe it, without telling him one word of
untruth. Let me manage the matter, and I'll make him as jealous as a
very Osmyn; that is, provided he be actually in love.'

The scepticism of my friend upon this point was a continual source of
irritation to me; and, to own the truth, furnished one great cause of my
eagerness to ascertain my conquest beyond cavil. 'Well!' returned I,
already beginning to yield, 'if you could accomplish it honourably:
but--no--I should not like to be thought weak enough to entangle myself
with a man for whom I had no particular attachment.'

'I am certain,' returned Miss Arnold, more gravely, 'that if Mr Maitland
thought your honour concerned, far from considering the fulfilment of
even a tacit engagement as a weakness, he would highly admire you for
the sacrifice.'

The prospect of being 'highly admired' by Mr Maitland blinded me to the
sophistry of this answer; yet I felt myself unwilling that he should
actually believe me to be under engagement, and I expressed that
unwillingness to my adviser. 'Oh!' cried she, 'we must guard against
making him too sure. I would merely hint the thing, as what I feared
might happen, and leave you an opening to deny or explain at any time.
As I live, there he comes, just at the lucky moment! Now, leave him to
me for half an hour, and I will engage to bring him to confession; that
is, if he has any thing to confess.'

'Well! I should like to see you convinced for once, if it be possible to
convince you; and yet what if he should----'

'Oh, there's his knock!' interrupted Juliet. 'If we stand here
objecting, we shall lose the opportunity. Sure you can trust to my
management.'

'Well, Juliet,' said I, with a prophetic sigh, 'do as you please; but,
for Heaven's sake, be cautious!' She instantly accepted the permission,
and flew down stairs to receive him in the parlour.

Let no woman retain in her confidence the treacherous ally who once
persuades or assists her to depart from the plain path of simplicity.
Such an ally, whatever partial fondness may allege, must be deficient
either in understanding or in integrity. That the associate who incites
you to deceive others will in time deceive yourself, is the least evil
to be apprehended from such a connection. The young are notoriously
liable to the guidance of their intimates; and most women are, in this
respect, young all their lives. If I had naturally any good tendency, it
was toward sincerity; and yet a false friend, working on my ruling
passion, had led me to the brink of actual deceit. So stable are the
virtues which are founded only in constitution or humour! Had I been
wisely unrelenting to the first artifice of pretended friendship, and
honestly abhorrent even of the wile which professed to favour me, the
bitterest misfortunes of my life might have been spared; and I might
have escaped from sufferings never to be forgotten, from errors never to
be cancelled.

My punishment began even during the moments of Miss Arnold's conference
with Maitland. I was restless and agitated. My heart throbbed violently,
less with the hopes of triumph than with the anxiousness of duplicity,
and the dread of detection. I trembled; I breathed painfully; at every
noise I started, thinking it betokened the close of the conference,
which yet seemed endless. Again and again I approached the parlour door,
and as often retreated, fearing to spoil all by a premature
interruption. I was once more resolving to join my friend, when I heard
some one leave the house. I flew to a window, and saw Maitland walk
swiftly along the square, and disappear, without once looking back. This
seemed ominous; but as my friend did not come to make her report, I went
in search of her.

I found her in an attitude of meditation; and though she instantly
advanced towards me with a smile, her countenance bore traces of
discomposure. 'Well, I protest,' cried she, 'there is no dealing with
these men without a little management.'

This sounded somewhat like a boast; and, my spirits reviving, I enquired
'how her management had succeeded?'

'You shall judge,' returned Miss Arnold. 'I will tell you all exactly
and candidly.' People seldom vouch for the candour of their narratives
when it is above suspicion. 'I could not be abrupt, you know,' proceeded
my _candid_ narrator; 'but I contrived to lead dexterously towards the
point; and, after smoothing my way a little just hinted a possibility
that Lord Frederick might succeed. Signor Maestoso took not the least
notice. Then I grew a little more explicit. Still without effect! He
only fixed his staring black eyes upon me, as if he would have looked
through me, to see what was my purpose in telling him all that. At last
I was obliged to say downrightly (Heaven forgive me for the fib!) that I
was afraid you might marry De Burgh at last, though I owned you had no
serious regard for him. All this while Don Pompous had been walking
about the room; but at this he stopped short, just opposite to me, and
asked me, with a frown as dark as a thunder cloud, "what reason I had to
say so?"--I--I declare, I was quite frightened.'

Miss Arnold stopped, and seemed to hesitate. 'Well! Go on!' cried I
impatiently.--'You know,' continued she, 'I could not answer his
question in any other way, except by giving him some little instances of
your--your good understanding with De Burgh; but still I could extort no
answer from the impenetrable creature, except now and then a kind of
grunt.'

'How tedious you are! Do proceed.'

'At last, when I found nothing else would do, I--I was obliged to have
recourse to--to an expedient, which produced an immediate effect. And
now, Ellen, I am convinced that Maitland loves you to distraction!'

'Indeed! What? How?'

'Ah, Ellen! you have a thousand times more penetration than I. I would
give the world for your faculty of reading the heart.'

'But, dear Juliet! how was it,--how did you discover----'

'Why, when nothing else seemed likely to avail, I--I thought I might
venture to hint, just by way of a trifling instance of your intimacy
with Lord Frederick, that--that you had--had borrowed a small sum from
him.'

'Good heaven, Juliet! did you tell Maitland this? Oh! he will despise me
for ever. Leave me,--treacherous,--you have undone me.'

'Ellen, my dearest Ellen,' said my friend, caressing me with the most
humble affection, 'I own I was very wrong; but indeed--indeed, if you
had seen how he was affected, you would have been convinced, that
nothing else could have been so effectual. If you had seen how pale he
grew, and how he trembled, and gasped for breath! You never saw a man in
such agitation. Dear Ellen, forgive me! You know I could have no motive
except to serve you.'

In spite of my vexation, I was not insensible to this statement, to
which my vanity gave full credit; though the slightest comparison of the
circumstances with the character of Maitland must have convinced me that
they were exaggerated. At length, curiosity so far prevailed over my
wrath, that I condescended to enquire what answer he had given to Miss
Arnold's information? Miss Arnold replied, that the first words which he
was able to utter, announced, that he must see me instantly. 'And why
then,' I asked, 'is he gone in such haste?'

My friend made me repeat this question before she could hear it;--an
expedient which often serves those whose answer is not quite ready.
'Because he--he afterwards changed his mind, and said he would call upon
you in an hour.'

Before the hour had elapsed, my resentment had yielded partly to my
friend's representations, partly to a new subject of alarm. I dreaded
lest, if Maitland considered my debt to Lord Frederick in so serious a
light, he might think it a duty of friendship to apprize my father of my
involvement; and, anxious to secure his secrecy, yet too proud to beg
it, I suffered him, at his return, to be admitted to my dressing-room,
although I had never before been so unwilling to encounter him.
Maitland, on his part, seemed little less embarrassed than myself. He
began to speak, but his words were inarticulate. He cleared his throat,
and seized my attention by a look full of meaning; and the effort ended
in some insignificant enquiry, to the answer of which he was evidently
insensible. At last, suddenly laying his hand upon my arm, 'Miss Percy,'
said he, 'pardon my abruptness,--I really can neither think nor talk of
trifles at this moment. Let me speak plainly to you. Allow me for once
the privilege of a friend. You cannot have one more sincere than myself;
nor,' added he with a deep sigh, 'one more disinterested.'

'Well!' returned I, moved by the kindness of his voice and manner, and
willing to shake off my embarrassment; 'use the privilege generously,
and I don't care if, for once, I grant it you.'

Maitland instantly, without compliment or apology, availed himself of my
concession. 'I presume,' said he, 'that Miss Arnold has acquainted you
with her very strange communication to me this morning.' I only bowed in
answer, and did not venture again to raise my head. 'Did she tell you,
too,' proceeded Maitland, in the tone of strong indignation, 'that she
meant to conceal from you this most unprovoked act of treachery, had I
not insisted upon warning you against a confidant who could betray your
secret,--and such a secret!'

Abashed and humbled, conscious that since my friend had been partly
licensed by myself, she was less blamable than she appeared, yet unable,
without exposing myself still farther, to state what little could be
alleged in her vindication, I stammered out a few words; implying, that
perhaps Miss Arnold did not affix any importance to the secret.

'The inferences she drew,' cried Maitland, 'leave no doubt, that she
thought it important; or, granting it were as you say, is the woman fit
to be a friend who could regard such a transaction as immaterial? Is
there any real friend to whom you could confide it without reluctance? I
need not ask if you have intrusted it to your father.'

The tears of mortification and resentment which had been collected in my
eyes while Maitland spoke, burst from them when I attempted to answer.
But my wounded pride quickly came to my assistance. 'No, sir,' returned
I; 'but if you think your own reproofs insufficient you will of course
aid them with my father's.'

Maitland could not resist the sight of my uneasiness. His countenance
expressed the most gentle compassion; and his voice softened even to
tenderness. 'And is the reproof of a father,' said he, 'more formidable
to you than all that your delicacy must suffer under obligation to a
confident admirer? Dearest Miss Percy, as a friend--a most attached,
most anxious friend--I beseech you to----'

He stopped short, and coloured very deeply,--suddenly aware, I believe,
that he was speaking with a warmth which friendship seldom assumes; then
taking refuge in a double intrenchment of formality, he begged me to
pardon a freedom which he ascribed to his friendship for my father and
Miss Mortimer. In spite of my mortifying situation, my heart bounded
with triumph as I traced through this disguise the proofs of my power
over the affections of Maitland. Recovering my spirits, I told him
frankly, that I was determined to make no application to my father,
since a few weeks would enable me to escape from my difficulty without
the hazard of incensing him. Maitland looked distressed, but made no
further attempt to persuade me. 'This is what I feared,' said he; 'but I
am sensible that I have no right to urge you.'

He was silent for some moments, and seemed labouring with something
which he knew not how to utter. A certain tremour began to steal over
me too, and expectation made my breath come short when I again heard
his voice. 'There may be an impropriety,' he began, but again he
stopped embarrassed. 'There may be objections against your--your
condescension to Lord Frederick, which do not apply to all your
acquaintance;--and--and I have taken the liberty to--to bring a few
hundred pounds in case you would do me the honour to----' The manly
brown of Maitland's cheek flushed with a warmer tint as he spoke; and
the eye which had so often awed my turbulent spirit, now sunk timidly
before mine; for he was conferring an obligation, and his generous
heart entered by sympathy into the situation of one compelled to accept
a pecuniary favour. But I was teazed and disappointed; for here was
nothing of the expected declaration; on the contrary, Maitland had
wilfully marked the difference between himself and a lover.

He probably read vexation in my face, though he ascribed it to a wrong
cause. 'I see,' said he, in a tone of mortification, 'that this is a
degree of confidence which I must not expect. Perhaps you will suffer me
to mention the matter to Miss Mortimer--she I am sure will allow me to
be her banker for any sum you may require.'

Shame on the heartless being who could see in this delicate kindness
only a triumph for the most despicable vanity! In vain did Maitland veil
his interest under the semblance of friendship. Seeing, and glorying to
see, that passion lurked under the disguise, I could not restrain my
impatience to force the mask away. I thanked Maitland, but told him that
the delay of a few weeks could be of little importance; adding, gaily,
that I fancied Lord Frederick was in no haste for payment; and would
prefer the right of a creditor over the liberty of his debtor.

Maitland almost shuddered. 'Can you jest upon such a subject?' said he.
The expression of uneasiness which crossed his features only encouraged
me to proceed. 'No, really,' said I, with affected seriousness, 'I am
quite in earnest. One day or other I suppose I must give somebody a
right to me, and it may as well be Lord Frederick as another. Marriage
will be at best but a heartless business to me--Heigho!'

'I hope it will be otherwise,' said Maitland, with a sigh not quite so
audible as mine, but a little more sincere.

'No, no,' said I, sighing again, 'love is out of the question with me.
The creatures that dangle after me want either a toy upon which to throw
away their money, or money to throw away upon their toys. A heart would
be quite lost upon any of them. If, indeed, a man of sense and worth had
attached himself to me,--a man with sincerity enough to tell me my
faults,--with gentleness to do it kindly,--with--with something in his
character, perhaps in his manners, to secure respect,--he might
have--have found me not incapable of--of an animated--I mean of a--a
very respectful friendship.'

I could not utter this last sentence without palpable emotion. Nature,
which had done much to unfit me for deliberate coquetry, faltered in my
voice; and stained my cheek with burning blushes. In the confusion which
I had brought upon myself, I should have utterly forgotten to watch the
success of my experiment, had not my attention been drawn by the tremor
of Maitland's hand. I ventured, thus encouraged, to steal a glance at
his countenance.

His eye was fixed upon me with a keenness which seemed to search my very
soul. Deep glowing crimson flushed his face. It was only for a moment.
His colour instantly fading to more than its natural paleness, he almost
threw from him the hand which he had held. 'Oh, Ellen!' he cried in a
tone of bitter reproach, 'how can you! suspecting, as I see you do, the
power of your witchery over me, how can you!--Others might despise my
weakness--I myself despise it--but with you it should have been sacred!'

Where is the spirit of prophecy which can foretell how that, which at a
distance seems desirable, will affect us when it meets our grasp? Who
could have believed that this avowal, so long expected, so eagerly
anticipated, should have been heard only with shame and mortification!
Far, indeed, from the elation of conquest were my feelings, while I
shrunk from the rebuke of him, whose displeasure had, with me, the power
of a reproving angel. Abashed and confounded, I did not even dare to
raise my eyes; whilst Maitland, retreating from me, stood for some
moments in thoughtful silence. Approaching me again, 'No,' said he, in a
low constrained voice, 'I cannot speak to you now. Give me a few minutes
to-morrow:--they shall be the last.'

Before I could have articulated a word, had the universe depended upon
my utterance, Maitland was gone.

As soon as my recollection returned, I stole, like a culprit, to my own
apartment, where, locking myself in, I fell into a reverie; in which
stifled self-reproach, resentment against Miss Arnold, and an undefined
dread of the consequences of Maitland's displeasure, were but faintly
relieved by complacency towards my own victorious charms. Maitland's
parting words rung in my ears; and though I endeavoured to persuade
myself that they were dictated by a resentment which could not resist
the slightest concession from me, they never recurred to my mind
unattended by some degree of alarm. I was determined, however, that no
consideration should tempt me to betray the cause of my sex, by humbling
myself before a proud lover; 'and, if he be resolved to break my chains,
let him do so,' said I, 'if he can.' I justly considered the loss of a
lover as no very grievous misfortune. Alas! I could not then estimate
the evil of losing such a friend as Maitland.

The next morning he came early to claim his audience; not such as I had
seen him the evening before; but calm, self-possessed, and dignified. He
entered upon his subject with apparent effort; telling me that he was
come to give me, if I had the patience to receive it, the explanation to
which he conceived me entitled, after the inadvertencies which had at
different times betrayed his secret. Provoked by his composure, I
answered, that 'explanation was quite unnecessary, since I did not
apprehend that either his conduct or motives could at all affect me.'

'Suffer me then,' said he, mildly, 'to explain them for my own sake,
that I may, if I can, escape the imputation of caprice.' I made some
light, silly reply; and, affecting the utmost indifference, took my
knotting and sat down. 'Have you no curiosity,' said Maitland, 'to know
how you won and how you have lost a heart that could have loved you
faithfully? Though my affections are of no value to you, you may one day
prize those which the same errors might alienate.'

'That is not very likely, sir,' said I. 'I shall probably not approach
so near the last stage of celibacy as to catch my advantage of any
wandering fancy which may cross a man's mind.'

'This was no wandering fancy,' said Maitland, with calm seriousness.
'You are the first woman I ever loved; and I shall retain the most
tender, the most peculiar interest in your welfare, long after what is
painful in my present feelings has passed away. But I must fly while I
can--before I lose the power to relinquish what I know it would be
misery to obtain.'

'Oh, sir, I assure you that this is a misery I should spare you,' cried
I; my heart swelling with impatience at a style of profession, for it
cannot be called courtship, to which I was so little accustomed.

'Now this is childish,' said Maitland. 'Are you angry at having escaped
being teazed with useless importunity? If you would have me feel all the
pang of leaving you, call back the candour and sweetness that first
bewitched me. For it was not your beauty, Ellen. I had seen you more
than once ere I observed that you were beautiful, and twenty times ere
I felt it. It was your playful simplicity, your want of all design, your
perfect transparency of mind, that won upon me before I was aware; and
when I was weary of toil and sick of the heartlessness and duplicity of
mankind, I turned to you, and thought--, it matters not what.'

Maitland paused, but I was in no humour to break the silence. My anger
gave place to a more gentle feeling. I felt that I had possessed, that I
had lost, the approbation of Maitland, and the tears were rising to my
eyes; but the fear that he should ascribe them to regret for the loss of
his stoic-love, forced them back to the proud heart.

'Yet,' continued Maitland, 'I perceived, pardon my plainness, that your
habits and inclinations were such as must be fatal to every plan of
domestic comfort; and at four-and-thirty a man begins to foresee, that,
after the raptures of the lover are past, the husband has a long life
before him; in which he must either share his joys and his sorrows with
a friend, or exact the submission of an inferior. To be a restraint upon
your pleasure is what I could not endure; yet otherwise they must have
interfered with every pursuit of my life,--nay, must every hour have
shocked my perceptions of right and wrong. Nor is this all,' continued
Maitland, guiding my comprehension by the increased solemnity of his
manner. 'Who that seeks a friend would choose one who would consider his
employments as irksome, his pleasures as fantastic, his hopes as a
dream?--one who would regard the object of his supreme desire as men do
a fearful vision, visiting them unwelcome in their hours of darkness,
but slighted or forgotten in every happier season? No, Ellen! the wife
of a Christian must be more than the toy of his leisure;--she must be
his fellow-labourer, his fellow-worshipper.'

'Very well, sir!' interrupted I, my spirit of impatience again beginning
to stir. 'Enough of my disqualifications for an office which I really
have no ambition to fill.'

'I believe you, Miss Percy,' returned Maitland, 'and that belief is all
that reconciles me to my sacrifice;--therefore beware how you weaken it
by these affected airs of scorn. I assure you, they were not necessary
to convince me that you are not to be won unsought. It was this
conviction which made me follow you even when I saw my danger. I
flattered myself that I might be useful to you,--or rather, perhaps,
this was the only device by which I could excuse my weakness to myself.
In a vain trust in the humility of a woman, and a trust yet more vain in
the prudence of a lover, I purposed to conceal my feelings till they
should be lost amidst the cares of a busy life. Your penetration, or my
own imprudence, has defeated that purpose, just as I begin to perceive
that you are too powerful for cares and business. Nothing, then, remains
but to fly whilst I have the power. In a fortnight hence, I shall sail
for the West Indies.'

I started, as if a dart had pierced me. The utmost which I had
apprehended from Maitland's threats of desertion, was, that he should
withdraw from our family circle. 'For the West Indies!' I faintly
repeated.

'Yes. It happens not unfortunately that I have business there. But I
have dwelt too long upon myself and my concerns. Since I must "cut off
the right hand," better the stroke were past. I have only one request to
make,--one earnest request, and then----' He paused. I would have asked
the nature of his request, but a rising in my throat threatened to
betray me, and I only ventured an enquiring look. Maitland took my hand:
and the demon of coquetry was now so entirely laid, that I suffered him
to retain it, without a struggle. 'Dear, ever dear Ellen,' said he,
'many an anxious thought will turn to you when we are far
asunder,--repay me for them all, by granting one petition. It is, that
you will confide your difficulties, whatever they be, to Miss Mortimer;
and, when you do so, give her this packet.'

'No, no,' interrupted I, with quickness. 'The sum I owe Lord Frederick
is a trifle compared to what you suppose it. It was the price of a
bauble,--a vile bauble. It was no secret,--hundreds saw it,--accident,
mere accident made me----'

Shocked at the emotion I was betraying, and in horror lest Maitland
should impute it to a humbling cause, I suddenly changed my manner;
haughtily declaring that I would neither distress my friend in her
illness nor incur any new obligation. Maitland modestly endeavoured to
shake my determination; but, finding me resolute, he rose to be gone.
'Farewell, Ellen,' said he,--'every blessing----,' the rest could not
reach my ear, but while I have being, I shall remember his look as he
turned from me. It was anguish, rendered more touching by a faint
struggle for a smile, that came like a watery beam upon the troubled
deep, making the sadness more dreary. I turned to a window, and watched
till he disappeared.

I have lived to be deserted by all mankind,--to wander houseless in a
land of strangers,--to gaze upon the crowds of an unknown city, assured
that I should see no friend,--to be secluded, as in a living grave, from
human intelligence and human sympathy; but never did I feel so
desolately alone, as when I turned to the chamber where Maitland had
been and felt that he was gone. Miss Mortimer's words flashed on my
mind. 'The good and the wise will one by one forsake you.'--'They have
forsaken me! all forsaken me!' I cried, as, throwing myself upon the
ground, I rested my head upon the seat which Maitland had left, hid my
face in my arm, and wept.




CHAPTER XIII

    _In a dull stream, which moving slow,
    You hardly see the current flow,
    When a small breeze obstructs the course,
    It whirls about for want of force;
    And in its narrow circle, gathers
    Nothing but chaff, and straw, and feathers.
    The current of a female mind
    Stops thus, and turns with every wind.
    Thus whirling round, together draws,
    Fools, fops, and rakes, for chaff and straws._

                                             Swift.


I imagine that such of my readers as are still in their teens, and of
course expect to find Cupid in ambush at every corner, will now smile
sagaciously, and pronounce, 'that poor Ellen was certainly in love.' If
so, I must unequivocally assert, that, in this instance, their
penetration has failed them. Maitland had piqued my vanity, he had of
late interested my curiosity; his conversation often amused me, and the
more I was accustomed to it, the more it pleased. It is said, that they
who have been restored to sight, find pleasure in the mere exercise of
their newly regained faculty, without reference to its usefulness, or
even to the beauty of the objects they behold; so I, without a thought
of improving by Maitland's conversation, and with feeble perceptions of
its excellence, was pleased to find in it occupation for faculties,
which, but for him, might have slumbered inactive. I had a sort of
filial confidence in his good will, and a respect approaching to
reverence for his abilities and character. But this was all; for amidst
all my follies, I had escaped that susceptibility which makes so many
young women idle, and so many old ones ridiculous.

Lest, however, my assertion seem liable to the suspicion which attaches
to the declarations of the accused, I shall mention an irrefragable
proof of its truth. In less than twelve hours after Maitland had taken
his final leave, I was engaged in an animated flirtation with Lord
Frederick de Burgh. It is true, that for some days I used to start when
the knocker sounded at the usual hour of Maitland's visit, and to hear
with a vague sensation of disappointment some less familiar step
approach. It is true, that I loved not to see his seat occupied by
others, and that I never again looked towards the spot where he finally
disappeared from my sight, without feeling its association with
something painful. But I suppose it may be laid down as a maxim, that no
woman who is seriously attached to one man, will trifle, _con spirito_,
with another; and my flirtations with Lord Frederick were not only
continued, but soon began to threaten a decisive termination.

In spite of my father's remonstrance, Lord Frederick's daily visits were
continued; for how could I interdict them after his Lordship had said,
nay sworn, that I must admit him, or make London a desert to him? We
also met often at the house of Lady St Edmunds, where, after Maitland's
departure, I became a more frequent guest than ever. Placable as Miss
Arnold had hitherto found me, I could not immediately forgive her
discovery to Maitland; for, willing to throw from myself the blame of
losing him, I more than half ascribed his desertion to her interference.
In resentment against one favourite, I betook myself with more ardour to
the other; with whom I spent many an hour, more pleasant, it must be
owned, than profitable.

Lady St Edmunds had a boudoir to which only her most select associates
were admitted. Nothing which taste could approve was wanting to its
decoration,--nothing which sense desires could be added to its luxury.
The walls glowed with the sultry scenes of Claude, and the luxuriant
designs of Titian. The daylight stole mellowed on the eye through a
bower of flowering orange trees and myrtles; or alabaster lamps
imitated the softness of moonshine. Airy Grecian couches lent grace to
the forms which rested on them; and rose-coloured draperies shed on
the cheek a becoming bloom. No cumbrous footmen were permitted to
invade this retreat of luxury. Their office was here supplied by a
fairy-footed smiling girl, whose figure and attire partook the
elegance of all around. Had books been needful to kill the time, here
were abundance well suited to their place; not works of puzzling
science or dull morality; but modern plays, novels enriched with
slanderous tales or caricatures of living characters, and fashionable
sonnets, guarded to the ear of decency, but deadly to her spirit. In
this temple of effeminacy, Lady St Edmunds and I generally passed our
morning hours, and it usually happened that Lord Frederick joined the
party. Here I often called forth my musical powers to delight my
companions, soothed in my turn by the yet sweeter sounds of flattery
and love. The easy manners of my hostess banished all restraint. The
timidity which had at first admired without venturing to copy, fled
before her neat raillery and free example; and high spirits,
encouragement, and inconsiderateness, often led me to the utmost
limits of discretion.

In such a scene, with such associates, can it be wondered, that I forgot
the manly sense, the hardy virtues of Maitland? No longer counteracted
by his ascendency, or checked by the warnings of Miss Mortimer, Lady St
Edmunds' influence increased every day, and strengthened into an
affection which utterly blinded me to every impropriety in her conduct
and sentiments;--an awful influence, which almost every girl of
seventeen allows more or less to some favourite. Happy the daughter who
finds that favourite where nature has secured to her a real
friend;--happy the mother who gains support for her authority in the
enthusiastic attachments of youth!

As Lady St Edmunds was no restraint upon me, her presence in our coterie
was rather advantageous to Lord Frederick, banishing the reserve of a
_tête-à-tête_, and allowing him constantly to offer gallantries too
indirect to provoke repulse, yet too pointed to be overlooked. Indeed,
such attentions from him were now become so habitual to me, that I
accepted of them as things of course, without consideration either of
motive or consequence. They amused and flattered me; and amusement and
flattery were the sum of my desires.

Things were in this train, when, one morning, the usual party being met
in the boudoir, Lady St Edmunds was called away to receive a visiter.
She went without ceremony; for she never reminded me of our difference
of rank, by any of those correct formalities by which the great are
accustomed to distance their inferiors. She gaily enjoined Lord
Frederick to entertain me; and he accepted of the office with a look
which prompted me, I know not why, to move hastily towards a harp, on
which I struck some chords. Lord Frederick stopped me; addressing me so
much more seriously than he had ever done before, that, in my surprise,
I suffered him to proceed without interruption. In the warmest phrase of
passion he besought me to tell him how long I meant to continue his
lingering probation; and protested, that he was no longer able to endure
my delays. The presumptuousness of this language was softened by tones
and gestures so humble, that I found it impossible to be angry! but I
was not a little confounded at a security which I had been far from
intending to authorise. Recovering myself as well as I was able, I
affected to receive his protestations in jest, telling him his
gallantries were now so hackneyed, that I had already exhausted all my
wit in replying to them; and that if he wished to find me at all
entertaining, he must positively call a new subject.

His Lordship abated nothing of his solemnity. He fell upon his knees,
conjured me to be serious, and talked of as many cruelties, racks, and
tortures, as would have furnished the dungeons of the Inquisition; yet
still the drift of his rhetoric seemed to be only this, that he had now
been for a very competent time the martyr of my charms, and therefore
was entitled to claim his reward.

Though somewhat alarmed, I still tried to laugh off the attack; telling
him that he had changed his manner much to the worse, since gravity in
him seemed the most preposterous thing in nature. 'Was it possible,'
Lord Frederick enquired with a tragedy exclamation, 'that I could thus
punish him for a disguise of gaiety which he had assumed only to mislead
indifferent eyes, but which he was certain had never deceived my
penetration?' And then he boldly appealed to my candour, 'whether I had
ever for a moment misunderstood him?' Too much startled and confounded
to persevere in my levity, I replied in the words of simple truth, 'that
I had never bestowed any consideration upon his meaning, since my father
had settled the matter.'

Lord Frederick poured forth all the established forms of abuse against
parental authority; execrating, in a most lover-like manner, the idea of
subjecting the affections to its control, and protesting his belief that
I had too much spirit to sacrifice him to such tyranny. Piqued at my
lover's implied security, I answered, 'that I had no inclination to
resist my father's will; and that so long as he did not require me to
marry any man who was particularly disagreeable to me, I should very
willingly leave a negative in his power.' Lord Frederick struck his hand
upon his forehead, and raised his handkerchief to his eyes, as if to
conceal extreme agitation. 'Cruel, cruel, Miss Percy!' he cried, 'if
such are, indeed, your sentiments,--if you are, indeed, determined to
submit to the decision of your inhuman father, why--why did you, with
such barbarous kindness, restore the hopes which he had destroyed? Why
did you, in this very room, allow me to hope that you would reward my
faithful love,--that you would fly with me to that happy land where
marriage is still free!'

My masquerade folly thus recalled to my recollection, the blood rushed
tumultuously to my face and bosom. Unable to repel the charge, and
terrified by this glimpse of the shackles which my imprudence had forged
for me, I stammered out, that, 'whatever I might have said in a
thoughtless moment, I was sure that no friend of Lord Frederick's or
mine would advise either of us to so rash a step.'

'No friend of mine,' returned Lord Frederick, using the gestures of
drying his fine blue eyes, 'shall ever again be consulted. Could I have
foreseen your cruel treatment, never would I have put it in the power,
even of my nearest relative, to injure you by publishing the hopes you
had given.'

The hint, conveyed in these words, was not lost upon me. I concluded,
that Lord Frederick had thought himself authorised to talk of the
encouragement he had received. Our sense of impropriety is rarely so
just as to gain nothing from anticipating the judgment of our
fellow-creatures; and the levity which I had practised as an innocent
trifling, took a very different form, when I saw it by sympathy, in the
light in which it might soon be seen by hundreds. The folly into which I
had been seduced by malice, vanity, and the love of amusement, would
stand charactered in the world's sentence, as unjustifiable coquetry.
Viewed in its consequences, as ruinous to the peace of a heart that
loved me, I myself scarcely bestowed upon it a gentler name.

Confused, perplexed, and distressed, not daring to meet the eye of the
man whom I had injured, I sat looking wistfully towards the door, more
eager to escape from my present embarrassment than able to provide
against the future. Lord Frederick instantly saw his advantage. 'I have
wronged you, my heavenly Ellen,' he cried, throwing himself in rapture
at my feet. 'I see that, upon reflection, you will yet allow my claim.
How could I suspect my dear, generous Miss Percy of trifling with the
fondest passion that ever warmed a human breast!'

I involuntarily recoiled, for I had never been less tenderly disposed
towards Lord Frederick than at that moment. 'Really, my Lord,' I said,
'even if I could return all this enthusiasm, which indeed I cannot, I
should give a poor specimen of my generosity by consenting to involve
you in the difficulties which might be the consequence of disobliging my
father.'

Lord Frederick cursed wealth in the most disinterested manner
imaginable,--swore that 'the possession of his adorable Ellen was all he
asked of Heaven,'--and fervently wished, that 'the splendour of his
fortune, and the humbleness of mine, had given him an opportunity of
proving how lightly he prized the dross when put in balance with my
charms.' Though the loftiness of this style was too incongruous with
Lord Frederick's general manner to excite no surprise, I must own, that
it awakened not one doubt of his sincerity,--for what will not vanity
believe? The more credit I gave his generosity, the more did I feel the
injustice of my past conduct, yet the more painful it became to enter
upon explanation; and I was not yet practised enough in coquetry to
suppress the embarrassment which faltered on my tongue, as I told Lord
Frederick, that 'I was sorry--very sorry, and much astonished; and that
I had never suspected him of allowing such a romantic fancy to take
possession of his mind; that my father's determination must excuse me to
his Lordship and to the world, for refusing to sanction his hopes.'

Lord Frederick, in answer, vehemently averred, that his hopes had no
connection with my father's decision, since, after that decision, he had
been permitted to express his passion without repulse. He recalled
several thoughtless concessions which I had forgotten as soon as made.
Without formal detail, he dexterously contrived to remind me of the ring
which I had allowed him to keep; and of the clandestine correspondence
which I had begun from folly, and continued from weakness. He again
referred to my half consent at the masquerade. Finally, he once more
appealed to myself, whether, all these circumstances considered, his
hopes deserved to be called presumptuous.

During this almost unanswerable appeal, I had instinctively moved
towards the door; but Lord Frederick placed himself so as to intercept
my escape. Terrified, and revolting from the bonds which awaited me, yet
conscious that I had virtually surrendered my freedom,--eager to escape
from an engagement which yet I had not the courage to break,--I began a
hesitating, incoherent reply; but I felt like one who is roused from the
oppression of nightmare, when it was interrupted by the entrance of
Lady St Edmunds. I almost embraced my friend in my gratitude for this
fortunate deliverance; but I was too much disconcerted to prolong my
visit; and, taking a hasty leave, I returned home.

I had so long been accustomed to find relief from every difficulty in
the superior ingenuity of Miss Arnold, that my late resentment, which
had already begun to evaporate, entirely gave way to my habitual
dependence upon her counsels. Not that I, at the time, acknowledged this
motive to myself. Far from it. I placed my renewed confidence solely to
the credit of a generous placability of nature; for when any action of
mine claimed kindred with virtue, I could not afford to enquire too
seriously into its real parentage. However, I took an early opportunity
of acquainting Juliet with my dilemma. But my friend's readiness of
resource appeared now to have forsaken her. She protested that 'no
surprise could exceed hers; that she had never suspected Lord Frederick
of carrying the matter so far.' She feared 'that, however unjustly, he
might consider himself as aggrieved by a sudden rupture of our intimacy;
hinted how much the affair might be misrepresented by the industrious
malice of Lady Maria; and lamented that, on such occasions, a censorious
world was but too apt to take part with the accuser. But then, to be
sure, every thing must be ventured rather than disobey my father: she
would be the last person to advise me to a breach of duty, though she
had little doubt that it would be speedily forgiven.'

In short, all my skill in cross-examination was insufficient to discover
whether Miss Arnold thought I should dismiss Lord Frederick, or fly with
him to Scotland; or, taking that middle course so inviting to those who
waver between the right and the convenient, endeavour to keep him in
suspense till circumstances should guide my decision. Like a prudent
counsellor, she gave no direct advice, except that which alone she was
certain would be followed: she entreated me to hear the opinion of Lady
St Edmunds, and then to judge for myself.

The opinion of Lady St Edmunds was much more explicitly given. She
insisted that an overstrained delicacy made me trifle with the man whom
I really preferred. She laughed at my denials; asserting that it was
impossible I could be such a little actress as to have deceived all my
acquaintance, not one of whom entertained a doubt of my partiality for
Lord Frederick. One exception to this position I remembered with a sigh;
but he who best could have read my heart, and most wisely guided it,
was already far on his way to another hemisphere. In vain did I protest
my indifference towards all mankind. Lady St Edmunds, kissing my cheek,
told me she would save my blushes, by guessing for me what I had not yet
confessed to myself.

'Well!' cried I, a little impatiently, 'if I am in love with Lord
Frederick, I am sure I don't wish to marry him. I cannot be mistaken
upon that point. Some time ago, I should not much have cared; but now,
_indeed_ I would rather not.'

'Why should you be more reluctant now than formerly,' enquired Lady St
Edmunds, looking me intently in the face, 'unless you have begun to
prefer another?'

'Oh, not at all,' answered I, with great simplicity; 'I prefer nobody in
particular. But of late I have sometimes thought that, if I must marry,
I would have a husband whom I could respect,--whom all the world
respect; one who could enlighten and convince, ay, and awe other men;
one who need only raise his hand to silence an assembled nation; one
whose very glance----'

I stopped, and the glow which warmed my cheek deepened with an altered
feeling; for a smile began to play upon the lip of Lady St Edmunds, and
where is the enthusiasm that shrinks not from a smile? My friend,
laughing, asked which of the heroes of romance I chose to have revived
for my mate. 'But,' added she, shaking her head, 'when Oroondates makes
his appearance, we must not let Frederick tell tales; for constancy and
generosity were indispensable to a heroine in his time.'

Seeing me look disconcerted, she paused; then throwing her white arm
round my neck, 'My dearest Ellen,' said she, 'let me candidly own that
your treatment of poor De Burgh is not quite what I should have expected
from you. But,' continued she, with a tender sigh, 'had you been all
that my partiality expected, you must have become too--too dear to me!
You would have wiled my heart away from all living beings.'

'Dear Lady St Edmunds,' cried I, clasping her to my breast, 'tell me
what you expect from me now, and trust me I will never disappoint you.'

'My charming girl!' exclaimed Lady St Edmunds, 'far be it from me to
dictate to you. Let your own excellent heart and understanding be your
counsellors.'

'Indeed,' returned I, 'it would be an act of real charity to decide for
me. I am so terribly bewildered. I would not for the world act basely to
Lord Frederick; and I rather think that before he began to teaze me
about marrying him, I liked him better than any body--that is than any
man--almost. But then when I think of my father--and I love him so
dearly, and he has no other child--no one to love him but only me!
Indeed I cannot bear to thwart him.'

'My dear Ellen,' said Lady St Edmunds, 'I believe your father to be a
very worthy old gentleman, and I have a great respect for him; but,
indeed, his cause could not be committed to worse hands than mine; for I
can see no earthly business that he has to interfere in the matter. It
is not he who is to be married. For my own part, I married in very spite
of my father; and if I live till my children are marriageable, I shall
assuredly be reasonable enough to let them be happy in their own way.'

For a while, I defended the parental right, or rather the natural
sentiment which still remained to restrain my folly;--but the proper
foundation of filial duty, of all duty, was wanting in my mind, and
therefore the superstructure was unstable as the vapour curling before
the breeze. Even my good propensities had not the healthy nature of real
virtue. They were at best but the fevered flush adorning my sickly state
in the eyes of others, and fatally disguising it from my own. By
frequent argument, by occasional reflections, and by dexterous
confounding of truth and falsehood, Lady St Edmunds so far darkened my
moral perceptions, that Lord Frederick's claim seemed to outweigh that
of my father. Nor was the task hard; for honour and humanity are sounds
more soothing to human pride than the harsh name of submission.

Lord Frederick himself meanwhile watched vigilantly over his own
interests, and was abundantly importunate and encroaching. Miss Arnold,
indeed, continued to affect prudent counsels; but while she offered me
such feeble dissuasives as rather served to excite than to deter, she
procured or invented intelligence, which, with every expression of
indignation, she communicated to me, that Lady Maria had so far
misrepresented my indiscretion at the masquerade, as to make my marriage
with Lord Frederick a matter of prudence at least, if not of necessity.

Thus goaded on every side, without steadiness to estimate the real
extent of my difficulties, or resolution to break through them, having
no special dislike to Lord Frederick, nor any conscious preference for
another, I sanctioned in weakness the claims which I had conferred in
folly. I gave my lover permission to believe that I would soon reward
his constancy; if it can be called reward to obtain a wife, whose
violation of her early ties gives the strongest pledge that she will
disregard those which are new.

Still a lingering reluctance, the constitution of my sex, and the
expiring struggles of duty, made me defer, from time to time, the
performance of my engagement. But I was hurried at last into its
fulfilment, by one of those casualties which are allowed to decide the
most important concerns of the thoughtless and unprincipled. My father
one day surprised Lord Frederick at my feet; and, glad perhaps of an
opportunity to mark his contempt for the artificial distinctions of
society, as well as justly indignant at the disregard shown to his
injunctions, he dismissed my lover from the house, in terms more decided
than courtly.

As my father had four stout footmen to enforce his commands, his
Lordship had no choice but acquiescence. He therefore retired; and my
father, raising his foot to the panel of the room door, shut it with a
force that made the house shake. His sense of dignity for once giving
way to indignation, my father, instead of taking his well-known posture
of exhortation with his back to the fire, walked up to me, and strongly
grasping my hand, exclaimed, 'What the d--l do you mean, Ellen Percy?
Did not I tell you, I wouldn't have this puppy of a lord coming here a
fortune-hunting? Don't I know the kidney of you all; Don't I know, that
if you let a fellow chatter nonsense to you long enough, he is sure of
you at last?--Look you, Ellen Percy, let me have no more of this. I can
give you three hundred thousand pounds, and I have a scheme in my head
that may make it twice as much;--and I'll have your eldest son called
John Percy, ay, and his son after him; and you shall marry no proud,
saucy, aristocratical beggar, to look down upon the man who was the
making of him; d----n me, if you do, Ellen Percy.' Then throwing my arm
from him, with a vehemence that made me stagger, he quitted the room.

Even in minds far better regulated than mine, violence is more likely to
produce resentment than submission. My surprise quickly gave place to
indignation. The unceremonious expulsion of my visiter seemed nothing
short of an insult. To place me at the head of a family into which I
must admit no guest without permission, was treating me like a baby!--a
disgrace scarcely endurable to those who are still a little doubtful of
their right to be treated like women.

I earnestly recommend to all ladies who see cause of offence against
their rightful governors (an accident which will sometimes happen,
notwithstanding the universal meekness of ladies, and the well-known
moderation of gentlemen,) never to indulge in meditations upon past
injury, much less to exercise their prophetic eye upon future
aggression. Ill-humour gives contingent evils such a marvellous
appearance of certainty, that we seldom think it unjust to punish them
as if already committed.

No inference should have been drawn from my father's hasty words, except
that, being spoken in anger, they could not convey his permanent
sentiments; but I pondered them until I discovered that they clearly
foretold my being sacrificed to some ugly, old, vulgar, ignorant, gouty,
purse-proud, blinking-eyed, bandy-legged, stock-jobbing animal, with a
snuff-coloured coat, a brown wig, and a pen behind his ear. No wonder if
the assured prospect of such outrage redoubled mine ire!

But it had not yet reached its consummation. At dinner, Miss Arnold
happened to mention a public breakfast, to which Lady B---- had invited
us for the following morning. My father, who was far from affecting
privacy in his injunctions or reproofs, informed me, without
circumlocution, that I should go neither to Lady B----'s nor any where
else, till I gave him my word of honour that I would have no intercourse
with Lord Frederick de Burgh. 'I must stay at home, then,' said I, with
an air of surly resolution; 'for there is to be a ball after the
breakfast, and I have promised to dance with Lord Frederick.'

'Eat your breakfast at home then, Miss Percy,' said my father; 'and no
fear but you shall have as good a one as any Lady B---- in the land.'

Great was my disappointment at this sentence; for I had procured for the
occasion a dress upon which Lady Maria de Burgh had fixed her heart,
when there was no longer time to make another robe with similar
embroidery. But my wrath scorned to offer entreaty or compromise; and,
leaving the table, I retreated to my chamber, seeking sullen comfort in
the thought that I might soon emancipate myself from thraldom. In the
course of the evening, however, Miss Arnold, whose influence with my
father had of late increased surprizingly, found means to obtain a
mitigation of his sentence; but the good humour which might have been
restored by this concession, was banished by an angry command to refrain
from all such engagements with Lord Frederick for the future.

The next morning, while we were at breakfast (for a public breakfast by
no means supersedes the necessity of a private one) my father received a
letter, which he read with visible discomposure; and, hastily quitting
his unfinished meal, immediately left the house. I was somewhat startled
by his manner, and Miss Arnold appeared to sympathise still more deeply
in his uneasiness; but the hour of dressing approached, and, in that
momentous concern, I forgot my father's disquiet.

The fête passed as fêtes are wont to do. Every one wore the face of
pleasure, and a few were really pleased. The dancing began, and I joined
in it with Lord Frederick. Among the spectators who crowded round the
dancers, were Lady Maria de Burgh and her silly Strephon, Lord
Glendower. I at first imagined that she declined dancing, because the
lady who was first in the set was one of whom she might have found it
difficult to obtain precedence; but, just as it was my turn to begin,
she advanced and took her station above me. Provoked by an impertinence
which I ought to have despised, I remonstrated against this breach of
ball-room laws. Lady Maria answered, with a haughty smile, that she
rather conceived she had a right to dance before me. In vain did Lord
Frederick interfere. In vain did I angrily represent, that the right
claimed by her Ladyship ceased after the dance was begun. How could Lady
Maria yield while the disputed dress was full in her eye? At last,
seeing that the dance was suspended by our dispute, I proposed to those
who stood below me, that, rather than allow such an infringement of our
privileges, we should sit down. They, however, had no inclination to
punish themselves for the ill-breeding of another; and I, scorning to
yield, indignantly retired alone.

Lord Frederick followed me, as usual; and--but why should I dwell upon
my folly? Remaining displeasure against my father, a desire to have
revenge and precedence of Lady Maria, overcame for an hour my reluctance
to the fulfilment of my ill-starred engagement; and in that hour, Lord
Frederick had obtained my consent to set out with him the very next
morning for Scotland. Such are the amiable motives that sometimes enter
into what is called a love match!

To prevent suspicion, and by that means to delay pursuit, it was agreed,
that Lady St Edmunds should be made acquainted with our design; that she
should call for me early, and convey me in her carriage to Barnet, where
she was to resign me to the guardianship of my future lord. Miss Arnold
I determined not to trust; because she had of late been accustomed to
beg, with a very moral shake of the head, that I would never confide an
intended elopement to her, lest she should feel it a duty to acquaint my
father with my purpose.




CHAPTER XIV

    _Fair laughs the morn, and soft the zephyr blows,
    While, proudly riding o'er the azure realm,
    In gallant trim the gilded vessel goes,
    Youth on the prow, and pleasure at the helm;
    Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind's sway,
    That, hush'd in grim repose, expects his evening prey._

                                             Gray.


No sooner had I acquiesced in the arrangements for that event which was
to seal my destiny, than a confused feeling of regret came upon me. An
oppression stole upon my spirits. The sounds of flattery and
protestation I heard like a drowsy murmur, reaching the ear without
impressing the mind; and the gay forms of my companions flitted before
me like their fellow-moths in the sun-beam, which the eye pursues, but
not the thoughts. Yet I had not resolution to quit the scene, which had
lost its charms for me. To think of meeting my father's eye; or being
left to meditate alone in a home which I was so soon to desert; of
seeing the objects which had been familiar to my childhood wear the
dreary aspect of that which we look upon perhaps for the last time,
might have appalled one far better enured than I to dare the assaults of
pain. But at last even the haunts of dissipation were forsaken by the
throng, and I had no choice but to go.

Late in the night, silently, with the stealthy pace of guilt, I
re-entered that threshold which, till now, I had never trod but with the
first step of confidence. With breath suppressed, with the half reverted
eye of fear, I passed my father's chamber; as superstition passes the
haunt of departed spirits. In profound silence I suffered my attendant
to do her office; then threw myself upon my bed, with an eager but
fruitless wish to escape the tumult of my thoughts in forgetfulness.

Sleep, however, came not at my bidding. Yet, watchful as I was, I might
rather be said to dream than to think. A well ordered mind can dare to
confront difficulty,--can choose whether patience shall endure, or
prudence mitigate, or resolution overcome, the threatened evil. But when
was this vigorous frame of soul gained in the lap of self-indulgence?
When was the giant foiled by him who is accustomed to shrink even from
shadows? The dread of my father's displeasure,--an undefined reluctance
to the connection I was forming,--these, and a thousand other feelings
which crowded on my mind, were met with the plea, that no choice now
remained to me; the stale resort of those who are averse from their
fate, but more averse from the exertion which might overcome it. The
upbraidings of conscience, I answered with the supposed claims of
honour; silencing the inward voice, which might have told me, how
culpable was that levity which had set justice and filial duty at
unnatural variance. Considerate review of the past, rational plan for
the future, had no more place in my thoughts, than in the fevered fancy
that sees on every side a thousand unsightly shapes, which, ere it can
define one of them, have given place to a thousand more. At last this
turmoil yielded to mere bodily exhaustion; and my distressful musings
were interrupted by short slumbers, from which I started midway in my
fall from the precipice, or chilled with struggling in the flood.

I rose long before my usual hour, and sought relief from inaction in
preparations for my ill-omened journey. After selecting and packing up
some necessary articles of dress, I sat down to write a few lines to be
delivered to my father after my departure. But I found it impossible to
express my feelings, yet disguise my purpose; and having written nearly
twenty billets, and destroyed them all, I determined to defer asking
forgiveness till I had consummated my offence.

The hour of breakfast, which my father always insisted upon having
punctually observed, was past before I could summon courage to enter the
parlour. I approached the door; then, losing resolution, retired;--drew
near again, and listened whether my father's voice sounded from within.
All was still, and I ventured to proceed, ashamed that a servant, who
stood near, should witness my hesitation. I cast a timid glance towards
my father's accustomed seat; it was vacant, and I drew a deep breath, as
if a mountain had been lifted from my breast. 'Where is Mr Percy?' I
enquired. 'He went out early, ma'am,' answered the servant, 'and said he
should not breakfast at home.' Miss Arnold and I sat down to a silent
and melancholy meal. I could neither speak of the subject which weighed
upon my heart, nor force my attention to any other theme.

And now a new distress assailed me. While I had every moment expected
the presence of an injured parent, dread of that presence was all
powerful. But now when that expectation was withdrawn, my soul recoiled
from tearing asunder the bonds of affection, ere they were loosened by
one parting word,--one look of farewell. I remembered, that our last
intercourse had been chilled by mutual displeasure, and could I go
without uttering one kindly expression?--without striving to win one
little endearment which I might treasure in my heart, as perhaps a last
relic of a father's love? I quitted my scarcely tasted meal, to watch at
a window for his coming. My eye accidentally rested on the spot where
Maitland had disappeared, and another shade was added to the dark colour
of my thoughts. 'He will never know,' thought I, 'how deeply my honour
is pledged; and what will he think of me, when he hears that I have left
my father?--left him without even one farewell! No! this I will not do.'

The resolution was scarcely formed, when I saw Lady St Edmunds' carriage
drive rapidly up to the door. I hastened to receive her; and drawing her
apart, informed her of my father's absence, and besought her, either to
send or go, and excuse me to Lord Frederick for this one day at least.
Lady St Edmunds expostulated against this instance of caprice. She
represented my father's absence as a favourable circumstance tending to
save me the pain of suppressing, and the danger of betraying my
feelings. She protested, that she would never be accessory to inflicting
so cruel a disappointment upon a lover of Lord Frederick's passionate
temperament. She remonstrated so warmly against the barbarity of such a
breach of promise, and expressed such apprehension of its consequences,
that, in the blindness of vanity, I suffered myself to imagine it more
inhuman to destroy an expectation of yesterday, than to blight the hopes
of seventeen years. Lady St Edmunds immediately followed up her victory,
and hurried me away.

I sought the companion of my early day, and hastily took such an
ambiguous farewell as my fatal secret would allow. 'Juliet,' said I,
wringing her hand, 'I must leave you for a while. If my father miss me,
you must supply my place. I charge you, dearest Juliet, if you have any
regard for me, show him such kindness as--as I ought to have done.' My
strange expressions,--my faltering voice,--my strong emotion, could not
escape the observation of Miss Arnold; but she was determined not to
discover a secret which it was against her interest to know. With an air
of the most unconscious carelessness, she dropped the hand which
lingered in her hold; and not a shade crossed the last smile that ever
she bestowed upon the friend of her youth.

A dark mist spread before my eyes, as I quitted the dwelling of my
father; and ere I was again sensible to the objects which surrounded me,
all that had been familiar to my sight were left far behind. Lady St
Edmunds cheered my failing spirits,--she soothed me with the words of
kindness,--pressed me to become her guest immediately on my return from
Scotland,--and to call her house my home, until my reconciliation with
my father; a reconciliation of which she spoke as of no uncertain event.
She interested me by lively characters of my new connections, pointing
out, with great acuteness, my probable avenues to the favour of each,
although it appeared that she herself had missed the way. Her
conversation had its usual effect upon me; and, by the time we reached
Barnet, my elastic spirits had in part risen from their depression. Yet,
when we stopped at the inn-door, something in the nature of woman made
me shrink from the expected sight of my bridegroom; and I drew back into
the corner of the carriage, while Lady St Edmunds alighted. But the
flush of modesty deepened to that of anger, when I perceived that my
lover was not waiting to welcome his bride. 'A good specimen this of the
ardour of a secure admirer,' thought I, as in moody silence I followed
my companion into a parlour.

The attendant whom Lady St Edmunds had despatched to enquire for Lord
Frederick now returned to inform her that his Lordship had not arrived.
'He must be here in five minutes at farthest,' said Lady St Edmunds, in
answer to a kind of sarcastic laugh with which I received this
intimation; and she stationed herself at a window, to watch for his
arrival, while I affected to be wholly occupied with the portraits of
the Durham Ox and the Godolphin Arabian. The five minutes, however, were
doubly past, and still no Lord Frederick appeared. Lady St Edmunds
continued to watch for them, foretelling his approach in every carriage
that drove up; but when her prediction had completely failed, she began
to lose patience. 'I could have betted a thousand guineas,' said she,
'that he would serve us this trick; for he never kept an appointment in
his life.'

'His Lordship need not hurry himself,' said I, 'for I mean to beg a
place in your Ladyship's carriage to town.'

After another pause, however, Lady St Edmunds declared her opinion, that
some accident must have befallen her nephew. 'Only an accident to his
memory, madam, I fancy,' said I, and went on humming an opera tune.

After waiting, however, nearly an hour, my spirit could brook the slight
no longer; and I impatiently urged Lady St Edmunds to return with me
instantly to town. My friend, for a while, endeavoured to obtain some
further forbearance towards the tardy bridegroom; but, finding me
peremptory, she consented to go. Still, however, she contrived to delay
our departure, by calling for refreshments, and ordering her horses to
be fed. At length my indignant pride overcoming even the ascendency of
Lady St Edmunds, I impatiently declared, that if she would not instantly
accompany me, I would order a carriage, and return home alone.

We had now remained almost two hours at the inn; and my companion
beginning herself to despair of Lord Frederick's appearance, no longer
protracted our stay. She had already ordered her sociable to the door,
when a horseman was heard gallopping up with such speed, that, before
she could reach the window, he was already dismounted. 'This must be he
at last!' cried Lady St Edmunds. 'Now he really deserves that you should
torment him a little.'

A man's step approached the door. It opened, and I turned away pouting,
yet cast back a look askance, to ascertain whether the intruder was Lord
Frederick. I saw only a servant, who delivered a letter to Lady St
Edmunds, and retired. The renewed anger and mortification which swelled
my breast were soon, however, diverted by an exclamation from my
companion, of astonishment not unmixed with dismay. Strong curiosity now
mingled with my indignant feelings. I turned to Lady St Edmunds; and
thought I gathered from her confused expressions, that she held in her
hand a letter of apology from Lord Frederick, which also contained
intelligence of disastrous importance.

What this intelligence was, I saw that she hesitated to announce. Her
hesitation alarmed me, for I was obliged to infer from it, that she had
news to communicate which concerned me yet more nearly than the
desertion of Lord Frederick. Already in a state of irritation which
admitted not of cool enquiry, I mixed my scornful expressions of
indifference as to the conduct of my renegado lover, with breathless,
half-uttered questions of its cause. 'Indeed, Miss Percy,' stammered
Lady St Edmunds, 'it is a very--very disagreeable office which Lord
Frederick has thought fit to lay upon me. To be sure, every one is
liable to misfortune, and I dare say you will show that you can bear it
with proper spirit. Your father--but you tremble--you had better swallow
a little wine.'

'What of my father?' I exclaimed; and with an impatience which burst
through all restraints, I snatched the letter from her hands; and, in
spite of her endeavours to prevent me, glanced over its contents. I have
accidentally preserved this specimen of modern sentiment, and shall here
transcribe it:--

     'My dear St E.,--The Percys are blown to the devil. The old one has
     failed for near a million. By the luckiest chance upon earth, I
     heard of it not five minutes before I was to set out. See what a
     narrow escape I have had from blowing out my own brains. I would
     have despatched Hodson sooner, but waited to make sure of the fact.
     I shall set about Darnel immediately--a confounded exchange, for
     the Percy was certainly the finest girl in London. By the by, make
     the best story you can for me. I know she likes me, for all her
     wincing; and I shall need some little private comfort, if I marry
     that ugly thing Darnel.

                                             'Yours ever,
                                                       'F. DE BURGH.

     'You need not quake for your five thousand--Darnel will bite at
     once.'

The amazement with which I read this letter instantly gave place to
doubts of the misfortune which it announced. I had been so accustomed to
rest secure in the possession of splendid affluence, that a sudden
reverse appeared incredible. It occurred to me that some groundless
report must have misled Lord Frederick, who was thus outwitted by his
own avarice. But, when I reached the close of his sentimental billet,
scorn and indignation overpowered every other feeling. 'The luckiest
chance!' I exclaimed. 'Well may he call it so! Oh what a wretch have I
escaped! What a complication of all that is basest and vilest!--No!'
said I, detaining with a disdainful smile the letter, which Lady St
Edmunds reached her hand to receive, 'No! this I will keep, as a
memorial of the disinterestedness of man, and the "passionate
temperament" of Lord Frederick de Burgh. Now, I suppose your Ladyship
will not object to returning instantly to town.'

Lady St Edmunds, who actually seemed to quail beneath my eye, made no
objection to this proposal; but followed in silence, as I haughtily led
the way to the carriage. We entered, and it drove rapidly homewards.

My thoughts again recurring to the letter, another light now flashed
upon me; and a stronger burst of resentment swelled my heart. 'This
epistle,' I suddenly exclaimed, 'is a master-teacher. It shows me the
sincerity of friends, as well as the tenderness of lovers. Where was
your boasted friendship, Lady St Edmunds?--where was your common
humanity, when you took advantage of a foolish pity--a mistaken sense of
honour--to lure me into a marriage with that heartless earth-worm? Me,
whom you pretended to love,--me, whom in common justice and
gratitude----' The remembrance of all my affection for this treacherous
friend choked my voice, and forced bitter--bitter tears to my eyes; but
pride, with a strong effort, suppressed the gentler feeling, and I
turned scornfully from the futile excuses and denials of my false
counsellor.

Resentment, however, at length began to give place to apprehension, when
I reflected upon the decisive terms in which Lord Frederick announced my
father's ruin, and the certainty which he must have attained of the
fact, before he could have determined finally to relinquish his pursuit.
Some circumstances tended to confirm his assertion. I now recollected
the letter which my father had read with such evident emotion; and his
unusual absence in the morning, before the customary hours of business.
I vainly endeavoured to balance against these his late boast of his
immense possessions, and the improbability of a wreck so sudden.

In spite of myself, an anxious dread fell upon me. My knees trembled; my
face now glowed with a hurried flush; and now a cold shudder ran through
my limbs. But disdaining to expose my alarm to her who had betrayed my
security, I proudly struggled with my anguish, affecting a careless
disbelief of my misfortune, and an easy scorn of the summer friendships
which had fled from its very name. I even strove to jest upon Lord
Frederick's premature desertion, bursting at times into wild hysterical
laughter.

The duration of our journey seemed endless; yet when I came within sight
of my father's house, I would have given a universe to delay the
certainty of what I feared. Every breath became almost a sob,--every
movement convulsive, while, in the agony of suppressed emotion, I fixed
my straining eyes upon my home, as if they could have penetrated into
the souls of its inhabitants. The carriage stopped; and, scarcely
hearing Lady St Edmunds' polite excuse for not entering the house of
mourning, I sprang towards the door.

It was long ere my repeated summons was answered. 'Has my father enquired
for me?' I hastily demanded, as I entered.

'No, ma'am,--he never spoke.'

'Is he at home?'

'Mr Percy is--is in the house, ma'am, but----' The man paused, and his
face wore a ghastly expression of horror.

A dark and shapeless dread rushed across my mind; but the cup was
already full, and I could bear no more. I sunk down in strong
convulsions.

And must I recall those hours of horror?--Must I bare, one by one, the
wounds which no time can heal?--Must I retrace, step by step, the
fearful way which led me to the very verge of madness?

Could I but escape one horrible picture, I would meet, without
recoiling, the remembrance of the rest. But it must not be. To make my
melancholy tale intelligible, the arrow must once more enter into my
soul, and the truth be told, though it palsy the hand that writes it.

A long forgetfulness was varied only by dim recollections, which came
and went like the fitful dreams of delirium. My first distinct
impression of the past was formed, when, awaking as if from a deep
sleep, I found myself alone in my chamber. My flight,--the humiliation
which it had brought upon me,--the treachery of my friend,--the prospect
of ruin, all stood at once before me.

My soul, already wounded by affection abused, felt the deserted
loneliness in which I was left as a confirmation of the dreaded evil.
Juliet Arnold, the companion of my pleasures, came to my thoughts, and
her absence stung me like neglect. 'All, all have forsaken me,' thought
I. 'Yet there is one heart still open to me. My father will love me
still. My father will take me to his breast. And if I must hear the
worst, I will hear it from him who has never betrayed me,--who will
never cast me off.'

With thoughts like these I quitted my bed, and stole feebly towards my
father's apartment. The lights which were wont to blaze cheerfully,--the
attendants who used to crowd the halls,--were vanished. A dark twilight
faintly showed my way. A strange and dreary silence reigned around me.

I entered my father's chamber. A red glare from the sky gave it a dismal
increase of light. Upon a couch lay a form that seemed my father's. The
face I saw not. A cloth frightfully stained with blood----No!--It cannot
be told.




CHAPTER XV

              _----And yet I breathed!
    But not the breath of human life!
    A serpent round my heart was wreathed,
    And stung my every thought to strife.
    Alike all time! Abhorred all place!
    Shuddering I shrunk from nature's face,
    Where every line that charmed before,
    The blackness of my bosom wore._

                                             Lord Byron.


From long and dangerous faintings, I revived almost to frenzy. I shed no
tears. These are the expression of a milder form of suffering. One
horrible image filled my soul; one sense of anguish so strong, so
terrible, that every other feeling,--every faculty of mind and body was
benumbed in its grasp. Vainly did my awful duties summon me to their
performance. I was incapable of action, almost of thought. My eye
wandered over surrounding objects, but saw them not. The words which
were spoken to me conveyed no meaning to my mind.

At length the form of my early friend seemed to flit before me. She
spoke; and though I could not follow the meaning of her words, the
sounds were those of kindness. The familiar voice, long associated with
so many kindly thoughts, reached the heart, waking a milder tone of
feeling; and resting my throbbing head upon her breast, I found relief
in a passionate burst of tears. Little did I think how small was the
share which friendship or compassion could claim in this visit of my
friend to the house of mourning! Little did I guess that its chief
motive was to rescue the gifts of my prodigality from being confounded
with the property of a bankrupt!

She did not long remain with me; for friends more sympathising than she
are soon weary of witnessing the unrestrained indulgence of grief. Yet
she did not leave me abruptly. She was too much accustomed to follow the
smooth path of conciliation, that she continued to pursue it even when
it no longer promised advantage; and she satisfied me with some
plausible excuse for going, and with a promise of speedy return.

The tears which for many hours I continued to shed relieved my oppressed
spirit; and by degrees I awoke to a full sense of my altered state. From
the proudest security of affluence,--from a fearless confidence in
myself, and in all around me, one fatal stroke had dashed me for ever. A
darker storm had burst upon me, and wrought a ruin more deep, more
irretrievable. That tie, which not the hardest heart resigns without
pain, had been torn from mine with force sudden and terrible; and a pang
unutterable had been added to that misfortune which turns love, and
reverence, and gratitude into anguish. What could be added to those
horrors, except that conscience should rise in her fury to remind me
that, when my presence might have soothed my father's sorrows, I had
been absent with an injurious purpose; and that the arrows of misfortune
had been rendered mortal by the rebellion of his child? This last
incurable pang the mercy of Heaven has saved me. I learned that my
father died ignorant of my intended flight.

Miss Arnold, I found, had quitted our house for that of her brother, as
soon as our last and worst disaster was discovered by the domestics. Of
all the summer friends who had amused my prosperity, not one approached
to comfort my affliction. Even my servants, chosen without regard to
their moral character, and treated with reference to its improvement;
corrupted by the example of dissipation; undisciplined and
uninstructed,--repaid the neglect of my domestic duties by a hardened
carelessness of my wants and will. After the first transports of grief
had subsided, I observed this desertion; and I felt it with all the
jealousy of misfortune. Not three days were passed since a crowd of
obsequious attendants had anticipated my commands; now I could scarcely
obtain even the slight service which real necessity required.

The remains of my unfortunate father still lay near me; and, unable to
overcome my horror of passing the chamber of death, I remained entirely
secluded in my apartment. The first intruder upon this seclusion was the
person who came to seal my father's repositories of papers and money.
Having performed his office elsewhere, he entered my apartment with
little ceremony; and, telling me that he understood my father had
intrusted me with jewels of value, informed me, that it was necessary to
prevent access to them for the present. Accustomed as I was to receive
all outward testimonies of respect, the intrusion of a stranger at such
a time appeared to me a savage outrage. I was ignorant of all the forms
of business; and his errand assumed the nature of the most insulting
suspicion. Had all the jewels of the earth lain at my feet he might have
borne them away unresisted by me; but the proud spirit which grief had
bowed almost to the dust roused itself at once to repel insult; and,
pointing to the casket, I haughtily commanded him to do his office
quickly and begone. By this sally of impatience, a few trinkets of value
which I might have justly claimed as my own were lost to me, being
contained in the casket which I thus suffered to be appropriated.

Insulted as I thought, and persecuted in my only place of refuge, I
became desirous to quit my dismal abode. I imagined, that whatever
impropriety there might be in the continuance of Juliet's residence in
my desolate habitation, there could be no reason to deter me from taking
refuge with my friend;--my gentle, my affectionate friend, who had ever
rejoiced in my prosperity, and gloried in my accomplishments, and loved
even my faults. Checking the tears which gushed from my eyes at the
thought that a father's roof must shelter me no more, I announced my
intention to my friend in a short billet:--'Come to me, dearest Juliet,'
I said, 'come and take me from this house of misery, I only stipulate,
that you will not ask me to join your brother's family circle. I wish to
see no human being except yourself,--for who is there left me to love
but you?--Your own ELLEN PERCY.'

The servant whom I despatched with this note brought back for answer,
that Miss Arnold was not at home. I had been accustomed to find every
one, but especially Miss Arnold, ever ready to attend my pleasure; and
even the easiest lessons of patience were yet new to the spoiled child
of prosperity. My little disappointment was aggravated by the
captiousness with which the unfortunate watch for instances of
coldness and neglect. 'Not at home! Ah,' thought I, 'what pleasure
should I have found in idle visiting or amusement, while she was
wretched?' Still I never doubted, that the very hour of her return
would bring her to welcome and to comfort her desolate friend. I
waited impatiently,--listened to every sound; and started at every
footstep which echoed through my dreary dwelling. But the cheerless
evening closed in, and brought no friend. I passed the hours, now in
framing her excuse, now in reproaching her unkindness, till the night
was far spent; then laid my weary head upon my pillow, and wept myself
to sleep.

The morning came, and I rose early, that I might be ready to accompany
my friend without delay. But I took my comfortless meal alone. Alone I
passed the hour in which Juliet and I had been accustomed to plan the
pastime of the day. The hour came at which my gay equipage was wont to
attend our call. Just then I heard a carriage stop at the door, and my
sad heart gave one feeble throb of pleasure; for I doubted not that
Juliet was come. It was the hearse which came to bear my father to his
grave.--Juliet, and all things but my lost father, were for a time
forgotten.

But as the paroxysm of sorrow subsided, I again became sensible to this
unkind delay. My billet had now been so long despatched without
obtaining a reply even of cold civility, that I began to doubt the
faithfulness of my messenger, I refused to believe that my note had ever
reached Miss Arnold; and I endeavoured to shut my eyes against the
indifference which even in that case was implied in her leaving me so
long to solitary affliction. I was going once more to summon the bearer
of my melancholy billet, that I might renew my enquiries in regard to
its delivery, when the long expected answer was at length brought to me.
I impatiently tore it open, anxious to learn what strong necessity had
compelled my friend to substitute for her own presence this colder form
of welcome. No welcome, even of the coldest form, was there. With many
expressions of condolence, and some even of affection, she informed me
of her sorrow 'that she could not receive my visit. I must be aware,'
she said, 'that one whose good name was her only dowry should guard the
frail treasure with double care. Grieved as she was to wound me, she was
obliged to say, that the publicity of my elopement appeared to her
brother an insuperable bar to the continuance of our intimacy.
Resistance to his will,' she said, 'was impossible, even if that will
had been less reasonable than, with grief, she confessed it to be. But
though she must withhold all outward demonstrations of regard, she would
ever remain my grateful and obedient servant.'

I sat motionless as the dead, whilst I deciphered these inhuman words.
The icebolt had struck me to the heart. For a time I was stunned by the
blow, and a dull stupor overpowered all recollection. Then, suddenly the
anguish of abused affection,--the iron fangs of ingratitude,--entered
into my soul; and all that grief, and all that indignation can inflict,
burst in bitterness upon the wounded spirit. I gazed wildly on the cruel
billet, while, twisting it in the grasp of agony, I wrenched it to atoms;
then, raising to heaven an eye of blasphemy, I dared to insult the Father
of Mercies with a cry for vengeance.

But the transport of passion quickly subsided into despair. I threw
myself upon the ground; longing that the earth would open and shelter me
from the baseness of mankind. I closed my eyes, and wished in bitterness
of soul that it were for ever. Sometimes, as memory recalled some kinder
endearment of my ill-requited affection, I would start as beneath the
sudden stab of murder; then bow again my miserable head, and remain in
the stillness of the grave.

No ray of consolation cheered me. The world, which had so lately
appeared bright with pleasure,--the worthy habitation of beings
benevolent and happy, was now involved in the gloom, and peopled with
the unsightly shapes of darkness. While my mind glanced towards the
selfishness of Lord Frederick, and the treachery of Lady St
Edmunds,--while it dwelt upon the desertion of her who, for seven years,
had shared my heart and all else that I had to bestow, the human kind
appeared to me tainted with the malignity of fiends, and I alone born to
be the victim of their craft,--the sport of their cruelty!

How often has the same merciless aspersion been cast upon their
fellow-creatures by those who, like me, have repelled the friendship of
the virtuous? How often, and how unjustly, do they who choose their
associate for the hour of sunshine, complain when he shrinks from the
bitter blast? Oh that my severe experience could warn unwary beings like
myself! Oh that they would learn from my fate to shun the fellowship of
the unprincipled! Even common reason may teach them to despair of
awakening real regard in her whom infinite benefits cannot attach,--nor
infinite excellence delight,--nor infinite forgiveness constrain. She
wants the very stamina of generous affection; and is destined to wind
her way through all the heartless schemes and cowardly apostasies of
selfishness.

From the stupor of despair, I was roused by the entrance of the stranger
who had before intruded. In the jealous reserve of an anguish too mighty
to be profaned by exposure, I rose from my dejected posture; and, with
frozen steadiness, enquired, 'what new indignity I had now to bear?'
The stranger, awed as it seemed by something in my look and manner,
informed me, not without respectful hesitation, that he was commissioned
by the creditors to tell me I know not what of forms and rights, of
willingness to allow me all reasonable accommodation, and such property
as I might justly claim, and to remind me of the propriety of appointing
a friend to watch over my further interests. One word only of the speech
was fitted to arrest my attention. 'Friend!' I repeated, with a smile
such as wrings the heart more than floods of womanly tears. 'Any one may
do the office of a friend! Ay, even one of those kindly souls who drove
my father to desperation,--who refused him the poor boon of delay, when
delay might have retrieved all! Any of them can insult and renounce me.
This is the modern office of a friend, is it not?'

The stranger, gazing on me with astonishment, proceeded to request, that
I would name an early day for removing from my present habitation; since
the creditors only waited for my departure, to dismiss the servants, and
to bring my father's house, with all that it contained, to public sale.
He added, that he was commissioned by them to present me with a small
sum for my immediate occasions.

To be thus forcibly expelled from the home, where, till now, I could
command; to be offered as an alms a pittance from funds which I had
considered as my hereditary right; to be driven forth to the cold world
with all my wounds yet bleeding, stung me as instances of severe
injustice and oppression. My spirit, sore with recent injury, writhed
under the rude touch. Already goaded almost to frenzy, I told the
stranger, that 'had I recollected the rights of his employers, I would
not have owed the shelter even of a single night to those whose
barbarous exactions had destroyed my father; nor would I ever be
indebted to their charity, so long as the humanity of the laws would
bestow a little earth to cover me.'

I pulled the bell violently, and gave orders that a hackney-coach should
be procured for me. It came almost immediately; and, without uttering
another word,--without raising my eyes,--without one expression of
feeling, except the convulsive shudderings of my frame, and the cold
drops that stood upon my forehead, I passed the apartment where my
father perished,--the spot where my mother poured upon me her last
blessing,--and cast myself upon the wide world without a friend or home.

I ordered the carriage to an obscure street in the city; a narrow, dark,
and airless lane. I had once in my life been obliged to pass through
it, and it had impressed my mind as a scene of all that is dismal in
poverty and confinement. This very impression made me now choose it for
my abode; and I felt a strange and dreary satisfaction in adding this
consummation to the horrors of my fate. As the carriage proceeded, I
became sensible to the extreme disorder of my frame. Noise and motion
were torture to nerves already in the highest state of irritation. Fever
throbbed in every vein, and red flashes of light seemed to glare before
my heavy eyes. A hope stole upon my mind that all was near a close. I
felt a gloomy satisfaction in the thought, that surely my death would
reach the heart of my false friend; that surely when she knew that I had
found refuge in the grave from calumny and unkindness, she would wish
that she had spared me the deadly pang; and would lament that she had
doubled the burden which weighed me to the earth.

When the carriage reached the place of its destination, the coachman
again applied to me for instructions; and I directed him to stop at any
house where lodgings could be obtained. After several ineffectual
enquiries, he drew up to the door of a miserable shop, where he was told
that a single room was to be hired. 'Would you please to look into my
little place yourself, madam?' said a decent-looking woman, who advanced
to meet me. 'It is clean, though it be small, and I should be very happy
that it would suit.'

'Any thing will suit me,' answered I.

'You, ma'am!' cried the woman in a tone of extreme surprise; then
placing herself just opposite to me, she seemed hesitating whether or
not she should allow me to pass. Indeed the contrast of my appearance
with the accommodation which I sought might well have awakened
suspicion. My mourning, in the choice of which I had taken no share, was
in material the most expensive, and in form of the highest fashion. The
wildness of despair was probably impressed on my countenance; and my
tall figure, lately so light and so elastic, bent under sickness and
dejection. The woman surveyed me with a curiosity, which in better days
I would have ill endured; but perceiving me ready to sink to the ground,
she relaxed her scrutiny, while she offered me a seat, which I eagerly
accepted. She then went to the door, upon pretence of desiring the
coachman to wait till I should ascertain whether her lodgings were such
as I approved; and they entered on a conversation in which I heard my
own name repeated. When she returned to me, she poured forth a torrent
of words, the meaning of which I was unable to follow, but which seemed
intended to apologise for some suspicion. Never imagining that my
character could be the cause of hesitation, I fancied that the poor
woman doubted of my ability to pay for my accommodation; and drawing out
my purse, I put into her hands all that remained of an affluence which
had so lately been the envy of thousands. 'It is but a little,' said I,
'but it will outlast me.'

I now desired to be shown to my apartment; and laboriously followed my
landlady up a steep miserable stair, into a chamber, low, close, and
gloomy. In a sort of recess, shaded by a patched curtain of faded
chintz, stood a bed, which, only a few days before, no degree of fatigue
could have induced me to occupy. Worn out, and heartbroken as I was, I
yet recoiled from it for a moment. 'But it matters not,' thought I, 'I
shall not occupy it long;' so I laid myself down without undressing, and
desired that I might be left alone.

I was now, indeed, alone. In the wilfulness of desperation, I had myself
severed the few and slender ties which might still have bound me to
mankind; and I felt a sullen pleasure in the thought that my retreat was
inscrutable alike to feeble compassion and to idle curiosity. The widow,
whose roof afforded my humble shelter, and her daughter, a sickly,
ignorant, but industrious creature, at first persecuted me with
attentions; vainly trying to bribe, with such delicacies as they could
procure, the appetite which turned from all with the loathing of
disease. They urged me to send for my friends, and for medical advice.
They tried, though ignorant of my real distemper, to soothe me with
words of rude comfort. All was in vain. I seldom looked up, or returned
any other answer than a faint gesture of impatience; and, weary of my
obstinate silence, they at last desisted from their assiduities, nor
ever intruded on my solitude, except to bring relief to the parching
thirst which consumed me.

Day after day passed on in the same dreary quiet. Night, and the
twilight of my gloomy habitation, succeeded each other, unnoticed by me.
Disease was preying on my constitution,--hopeless and indignant
rejection rankled in my mind. My ceaseless brooding over injury and
misfortune was only varied by the dreary consolation that all would soon
be lost in the forgetfulness of the grave.

And could a rational and immortal creature turn on the grave a hope in
which religion had no part? Could a being, formed for hope and for
enjoyment, lose all that the earth has to offer, without reaching
forward an eager grasp towards joys less transient? When the meteors
which I had so fondly pursued were banished for ever, did no ray from
the Fountain of Light descend to cheer my dark dwelling?--No. They who
have tasted that the Lord is good, return in their adversity with double
eagerness to taste his goodness. But I had lived without God in my
prosperity, and my sorrow was without consolation. In the sunshine of my
day I had refused the guiding cloud; and the pillar of fire was
withdrawn from my darkness. I had forgotten Him who filleth heaven and
earth,--and the heavens and the earth were become one dreary blank to
me. The tumult of feeling, indeed, unavoidably subsided; but it was into
a calm,--frozen, stern, and cheerless as the long night-calm of a polar
sea.

From the supineness of sickness and despair, I was at last forced to
momentary exertion. My landlady renewed her entreaties that I would send
for my friends; enforcing her request by informing me that my little
fund was nearly exhausted. Disturbed with her importunity, and careless
of providing against difficulties from which I expected soon to escape,
I commanded her to desist. But my commands were no longer indisputable.
The woman probably fearing, from the continuance of my disorder, that my
death might soon involve her in trouble and expense, persisted in her
importunity. Finding me obstinately determined to persevere in
concealment, she proceeded to hint not obscurely, that it would be
necessary to consider of some means of supply, or to provide myself with
another abode. Only a few days were past since an insinuation like this
would have driven me indignant from a palace; but now the depression of
sickness was added to that of sorrow, and I only answered, that when I
could no longer repay her trouble, I would release her from it.

Dissatisfied, however, with an assurance which she foresaw that I might
be unable to fulfil, the widow proceeded to enquire whether I retained
any properly which could be converted into money; and mentioned a ring
which she observed me to wear. Dead as I was to all earthly affection, I
firmly refused to part with this ring, for it had been my mother's. I
had drawn it a hundred times from her slender hand, and she thought it
best employed as a toy for her little Ellen, while yet its quickly
shifting rays made its only value to me. 'No!' said I, as the woman
urged me to dispose of it, 'this shall go with me to the grave, in
memory that one heart had human feeling towards me.' The landlady,
however, venturing a tedious remonstrance against this resolution, the
dying fire again gave a momentary flash. 'Be silent,' I cried. 'Speak to
me no more till I am penniless; then tell me so at once, and I will that
instant leave your house, though I die at the threshold!' Highly
offended by this haughty command, the woman immediately retired, leaving
me for the rest of that day in total solitude.

An evil was now ready to fall upon me, for which I was wholly unprepared
either by experience or reflection. Unaccustomed as I was to approach
the abodes of poverty, the very form of want was new to me; and since I
had myself been numbered with the poor, my thoughts had chiefly dwelt
upon my past misfortunes, or taken refuge from the anticipation of
future distress in the prospect of dissolution. But, in spite of my
wishes and my prophecies, abstinence, and the strength of my
constitution, prevailed over my disorder. My heavy eyes were this night
visited by a deep and refreshing sleep, from which I awoke not till a
mid-day sun glanced through the smoke a dull ray upon the chimney crags
that bounded my horizon.

I looked up with a murmur of regret that I was restored to
consciousness. 'Why,' thought I, 'must the flaring light revisit those
to whom it brings no comfort?' and I closed my eyes in thankless
impatience of my prolonged existence. Oh, where is the _human_
physician, whose patience would endure to have his every prescription
questioned, and vilified, and rejected! whose pitying hand would offer
again and again the medicine which in scorn we dash from our lips!--No!
Such forbearance dwells with one Being alone; and such perverseness we
reserve for the infallible Physician.

I presently became sensible that my fever had abated. With a deep
feeling of disappointment I perceived that death had eluded my desires;
and that I must return to the thorny and perplexing path where the
serpent lurked to sting, and tigers prowled for prey. While my thoughts
were thus engaged, a footstep crossed my chamber; but, lost in my gloomy
reverie, I suffered it, ere I raised my eyes, to approach close to my
bed. I was roused by a cry of strong and mingled feeling. 'Miss
Mortimer!' I exclaimed; but she could not speak. She threw herself upon
my bed, and wept aloud. The voice of true affection for a moment touched
my heart; but I remembered that the words of kindness had soothed only
to deceive; and stern recollection of my wrongs steeled me against
better thoughts.

'Why are you come hither, Miss Mortimer?' said I, coldly withdrawing
myself from her arms.

'Unkind Ellen!' returned my weeping friend; 'could I know that you were
in sorrow and not seek you? May I not comfort,--or, if that cannot be,
may I not mourn with you?'

'I do not mourn--I want no comfort--leave me.'

'Oh say not so, dearest child. You are not forbidden to feel. Let us
weep together under the chastisement, and trust together that there is
mercy in it.'

'Mercy! no. I have been dashed without pity to the earth, and there will
I lie till it open to receive me.'

Miss Mortimer gazed on me in sorrowful amazement; then, wringing her
hands as in sudden anguish, 'Oh, Heaven!' she cried, 'is this my
Ellen?--Is this the joyous spirit that brought cheerfulness wherever it
came?--Is this the face that was bright with life and pleasure?
Loveliest, dearest, how hast thou lost the comfort which belongs even to
the lowest of mankind,--the hope which is offered even to the worst of
sinners?'

'Leave me, Miss Mortimer!' I cried, impatient of the self-reproach which
her sorrow awakened in my breast. 'I wish only to die in peace. Must
even this be denied me?'

'Ellen, my beloved Ellen, is that what you call peace?--Oh Thou who
alone canst, deign to visit this troubled soul with the peace of thy
children!' Miss Mortimer turned from me, and ceased to speak; but I saw
her wasted hand lifted as in prayer, and her sobs attested the fervency
of the petition. After a short silence, making a visible effort to
compose herself, she again addressed me. 'Do not ask me to leave you,
Ellen,' said she. 'I came hither, resolved not to return without you. If
you are too weak to-day for our little journey, I will nurse you here.
Nay, you must not forbid me. I will sit by you as still as death. Or,
make an effort, my love, to reach home with me, and I will not intrude
on you for a minute. You shall not even be urged to join my solitary
meals. It will be comfort enough for me to feel that you are near.'

I could not be wholly insensible to an invitation so affectionate; but I
struggled against my better self, and pronounced a hasty and peremptory
refusal. Miss Mortimer looked deeply grieved and disappointed; but hers
was that truly Christian spirit whose kindness no ingratitude could
discourage, whose meekness no perverseness could provoke. She might have
checked the untoward plant in its summer pride; but the lightning had
scathed it, and it was become sacred in her eyes.

Sparing the irritability of the wounded spirit, she forbore to fret it
by further urging her request. She rather endeavoured to soothe me by
every expression of tenderness and respect. She at last submitted so
far to my wayward humour, as to quit my apartment; aware, perhaps, that
the spirit which roused itself against opposition might yield to
solitary reflection. The voice of kindness, which I had expected never
more to hear, stirred in my breast a milder nature; and as my eye
followed the feeble step of Miss Mortimer, and read her wasted
countenance, my heart smote me for my resistance to her love. 'She has
risen from a sick-bed to seek me,' thought I; 'me, renounced as I have
been by all mankind,--bereft as I am of all that allured the perfidious.
Surely _this_ is not treachery.'

My reverie was suddenly interrupted by poor Fido, who made good his
entrance as Miss Mortimer left the room; and instantly began to express,
as he could, his recognition of his altered mistress. The sight of him
awakened at once a thousand recollections. It recalled to my mind my
former petulant treatment of my mother's friend, her invariable patience
and affection, and the remorse excited by our separation. My mother
herself rose to my view, such as she was when Fido and I had gamboled
together by her side,--such as she was when sinking in untimely decay. I
felt again the caress which memory shall ever hold dear and holy. I saw
again the ominous flush brighten her sunken cheek; knelt once more at
her feet to pray that we might meet again; and heard once more the
melancholy cry which spoke the pang of a last farewell. The stubborn
spirit failed. I threw my arms round my mother's poor old favourite, and
melted into tears. These tears were the first which I had shed since the
unkindness of my altered friend had turned my gentler affections into
gall;--and let those who would know the real luxury of grief turn from
the stern anguish of a proud heart to the mild regrets which follow
those who are gone beyond the reach of our gratitude and our love.

Miss Mortimer did not leave me long alone. She returned to bring me
refreshment better suited to my past habits and present weakness than to
her own very limited finances. As she entered, I hastily concealed my
tears; but when her accents of heartfelt affection mingled in my soul
with the recollections which were already there, the claim of my
mother's friend grew irresistible. A half confession of my late
ingratitude rose to my lips; but that to which Ellen, the favoured child
of fortune, might have condescended as an instance of graceful candour,
seemed an act of meanness in Ellen fallen and dependent. I pressed Miss
Mortimer's hand between mine. 'My best, my only friend!' said I; and
Miss Mortimer asked no more. It was sufficient for the generous heart
that its kindness was at last felt and accepted.




CHAPTER XVI

          _----Fruit----some harsh, 'tis true,
    Pick'd from the thorns and briars of reproof;
    But wholesome, well-digested; grateful some
    To palates that can taste immortal truth;
    Insipid else, and sure to be despised._

                                             Cowper.


The news of my father's misfortune no sooner reached Miss Mortimer's
retirement, than she made an exertion beyond her strength, that she
might visit and comfort me. At my father's house, she learnt that I was
gone no one knew whither; but the conveyance which I had chosen enabled
her at last to trace my retreat, and she lost not a moment in following
me thither. There, with all the tenderness of love, and all the
perseverance of duty, she watched over my returning health; nor ever
quitted me by night or by day, till I was able to accompany her home.

It was on a golden summer morning that we together left my dreary
lurking-place. The sun shone forth as brightly as on the last day that I
had visited Miss Mortimer's abode; the trees were in yet fuller foliage;
and the hues of spring were ripening to the richer tints of autumn. The
river flashed as gaily in the beam, and the vessels veered as proudly to
the breeze. My friend sought to cheer my mind by calling my attention to
the bright and busy scene. But the smile which I called up to answer her
cares, came not from the heart. Cold and undelighted I turned from the
view. 'To what end,' thought I, 'should this prison-house be so adorned?
this den of the wretched and the base!' So dismal a change had a few
weeks wrought upon this goodly frame of things to me. But thus it ever
fares with those who refuse to contemplate the world with the eye of
reason and of religion. In the day of prosperity, this foreign land is
their chosen rest, for which they willingly forget their Father's house,
but when the hours of darkness come, they refuse to find in it even
accommodations fitted for the pilgrim 'that tarries but a night.'

When we had reached the cottage, and Miss Mortimer, with every testimony
of affection had welcomed me home, she led me to the apartment which was
thenceforth to be called my own. It was the gayest in my friend's simple
mansion. Its green walls, snowy curtains, and light furniture, were
models of neatness and order; and though the jessamine had been lately
pruned from the casement to enlarge my view, enough still remained to
adorn the projecting thatch with a little starry wreath.

On one side of my window were placed some shelves containing a few
volumes of history, and the best works of our British essayists and
poets; on the other was a chest of drawers, in which I found all the
more useful part of my own wardrobe, secured to me by the considerate
attention of Miss Mortimer. My friend rigidly performed her promise of
leaving my time wholly at my own command. As soon as she had established
me in my apartment, she resigned it solely to me: nor ever reminded me,
by officious attentions, that I was a guest rather than an inmate. She
told me the hours at which her meals were punctually served, giving me
to understand that when I did not choose to join them, no warning or
apology was necessary; since, if I did not appear in the family-room, I
should be waited upon in my own. These arrangements being made, she
advised me to repose myself after the fatigue of my journey, and left me
alone. Wearied out by an exertion to which my strength was yet scarcely
equal, I laid myself on a bed more inviting than the last which I had
pressed, and soon dropped asleep.

The evening was closing, when I was awakened by a strain of music so
soft, so low, that it seemed at first like a dream of the songs of
spirits. I listened, and distinguished the sounds of the evening hymn.
It was sung by Miss Mortimer; and never did humble praise,--never did
filial gratitude,--find a voice more suited to their expression. The
touching sweetness of her notes, heightened by the stillness of the
hour, roused an attention little used of late to fix on outward things.
'These are the sounds of thankfulness,' thought I. 'I saw her this
morning thank God, as if from the heart, for the light of a new day; and
now, having been spent in deeds of kindness, it is closed as it began
in an act of thanksgiving. What does she possess above all women, to
call forth such gratitude? She is poor, lonely, neglected. She knows
that she has obtained but a short reprieve from a disease which will
waste away her life in lingering torture. Good Heaven! What is there in
all this to cause that prevailing temper of her mind; that principle as
it would appear, of all her actions?--She must have been born with this
happy turn of thought. And, besides, she has never known a better
fate;--blest, that poverty and solitude have kept her ignorant of the
treachery and selfishness of man!'

The strain had ceased, and my thoughts returned to my own melancholy
fate. To escape from tormenting recollection, or rather in the mere
restlessness of pain, I opened a book which lay upon my table. It was my
mother's Bible. The first page was inscribed with her name, and the date
of my birth, written with her own hand. Below, my baptism was recorded
in the following words:--

'This eleventh of January, 1775, I dedicated my dearest child to God.
May He accept and purify the offering, though it be with fire!'

As I read these lines, the half prophetic words of my mother's parting
blessing flashed on my recollection. 'Oh, my mother!' I cried, 'couldst
thou have foreseen how bitter would be my "chastisement," couldst thou
have known, that the "fire" would consume all, would not thy love have
framed a far different prayer? Yes! for thou hadst a fellow-feeling in
every suffering, and how much above all in mine!'

I proceeded to look for some further traces of a hand so dear. The book
opened of itself at a passage to which a natural feeling had often led
the parent who was soon to forget even her child in the unconsciousness
of the grave; and a slight mark in the margin directed my eye to this
sentence: 'Can a mother forget her sucking babe, that she should not
have compassion upon the son of her womb? Yea, she may forget, yet will
not I forget thee.'

These words had often been read in my hearing, when my wandering mind
scarcely affixed a meaning to them; or when their touching condescension
was lost upon the proud child of prosperity. But now their coincidence
with the previous current of my thoughts seized at once my whole
attention. I started as if some strange and new discovery had burst upon
my understanding. Again I read the passage, and with a care which I had
never before bestowed on any part of the book which contains it. 'Is
this,' I enquired, 'an expression of the divine concern in each
individual of human kind?--No. It seems merely a national promise. Yet,
my mother has regarded it in another light; else why has she marked it
so carefully?'

It was in vain that I debated this question with myself. Such was my
miserable ignorance of all which it most behoved me to know, that I
never thought of explaining the letter of the Scriptures by resorting to
their spirit. My habitual propensities resisting every pious impression,
my mind revolted from the belief that parental love had adjusted every
circumstance of a lot which I accounted so severe as mine. To admit
this, was virtually to confess that I had need of correction; that I
had, to use Miss Mortimer's words, 'already reached that state when
mercy itself assumes the form of punishment.' Yet the soothing beauty of
the sentiment, the natural yearning of the friendless after an Almighty
friend, made me turn to the same passage again and again, till the
darkness closed in, and lulled me to a deep and solemn reverie.

'Does the Great Spirit,' thought I, 'indeed watch over us? Does He work
all the changes of this changeful world? Does He rule with ceaseless
vigilance,--with irresistible control, whatever can affect my
destiny?--Can this be true?--If it be even possible, by what strange
infatuation has it been banished from my thoughts till now? But it
cannot be so. A man's own actions often mould his destiny; and if his
actions be compelled by an extraneous energy, he is no more than a mere
machine. The very idea is absurd.' And thus, to escape from a sense of
my own past insanity, I entered a labyrinth where human reason might
stray for ever,

      And find no end, in wandering mazes lost.

But the subject, perplexing as it was to my darkened understanding, had
seized upon my whole mind; and sleep fled my pillow, whilst in spite of
myself the question again and again recurred; 'If I be at the mercy of a
resistless power, why have I utterly neglected to propitiate this mighty
arbitrator? If the success of every purpose even possibly depended upon
his will, why was that will forgotten in all my purposes?'

As soon as it was day I arose; and, with the eagerness of one who would
escape from suspense, I resorted to the book which had so lately
arrested my regard. I no longer glanced over its pages in careless
haste; for it offered my only present lights upon the questions,
interesting by their novelty as well as by their importance--whether I
had been guilty of the worse than childish improvidence, which, in
attending to trifles, overlooks the capital circumstance? or whether the
Creator, having dismissed us like orphans into a fatherless world, is
regardless of our improvement, and deaf to our cry? My impatience of
doubt made me forget, for a time, that the very fact which confers upon
Scripture its authority, supposes a divine interference in human
concerns. The great truth, however, shone forth in every page. All spoke
of a vigilant witness, a universal, a ceaseless energy. Nor was this
all. I could scarcely open the book without finding somewhat applicable
to my own character or situation; I was, therefore, no longer obliged to
compel my attention, as to the concerns of a stranger; it was powerfully
attracted by interests peculiarly my own. The study, indeed, was often
painful; but yet I returned to it, as the heir to the deed which is to
make him rich or a beggar.

My search, however, produced nothing to elate. I read of benefits which
I had forgotten; of duties which I had neglected; of threatenings which
I had despised. The 'first and great commandment,' directed every
affection of my soul to Him who had scarcely occupied even the least of
my thoughts. The most glorious examples were proposed to my imitation,
and my heart sunk when I compared them with myself. A temper of
universal forbearance, habits of diligent benevolence, were made the
infallible marks of a character which I had no right to claim. The happy
few were represented as entering with difficulty, and treading with
perseverance, the 'strait and narrow way,' which not even self-deceit
could persuade me that I had found. That self-denial, which was enjoined
to all as an unremitting habit, was new to me almost even in name. The
'lovers of pleasure,' among whom I had been avowedly enrolled, were
ranked, by my new guide, with 'traitors and blasphemers.' The pride
which, if I considered it at all as an error, I accounted the 'glorious
fault' of noble minds, was reprobated as an impious absurdity. The
anguish of repentance,--the raptures of piety,--the 'full assurance of
hope,' were poured forth; but, with the restless anxiety of him who
obtains an imperfect glimpse of the secret upon which his all depends, I
perceived, that their language was to me the language of a foreign land.

By degrees, something of my real self was opened to my sight. The view
was terrible; but, once seen, I vainly endeavoured to avert my eye. At
midnight, and in the blaze of day, in the midst of every employment, in
defiance of every effort, my offences stood before me. With the sense of
guilt, came the fear before which the boldest spirit fails. I saw the
decree already executed which took from me the 'talent buried in the
earth;' but, the stroke which had deprived me of all, seemed only a
prelude to that more awful sentence which consigns the unprofitable
servant to 'outer darkness.' As one who starts from sleep beneath the
uplifted sword,--as he to whom the lightning's flash reveals the
precipice,--as the mother waked by the struggles of her half-smothered
babe,--so I--but what material images of horror can shadow forth the
terrors of him who feels that he is by his own act undone? In an
overwhelming sense of my folly and my danger, I often sunk into the
attitude of supplication; but I had now a meaning to unfold not to be
expressed in a few formal phrases which I had been accustomed to hurry
over. I saw that I had need of mercy which I had not deserved, and which
I had no words to ask. How little do they know of repentance who propose
to repay with it, at their own 'convenient season,' the pleasures which
they are at all hazards determined to seize!

Meanwhile, though my misfortunes could not be banished from my mind,
they no longer held their sullen reign alone. New interests had awakened
in my breast; new fears; new regrets. I felt that there is an evil
greater than the loss of fame, of fortune, or of friends; that there is
a pang compared with which sorrow is pleasure. This anguish I endured
alone. The proud spirit could pour into no human ear the language of its
humiliation and its dread. I suffered Miss Mortimer to attribute to
grief the dejection which at times overpowered me; to impatience of
deprivation, the anxious disquiet of one who is seeking rest, and
finding none. Yet I no longer shunned her society. I sought relief in
the converse of a person rich in the knowledge in which I was wanting,
impressed with the only subjects which could interest me now. Miss
Mortimer was precisely the companion best calculated to be useful to me.
She never willingly oppressed me with a sense of her superiority,--never
upbraided my cold reception of doctrines which I was not yet fitted to
receive,--never expressed surprise at my hesitation, or impatience with
my prejudices,--never aggravated my sense of the danger of my state, nor
boasted of the security of her own; but answered my questions in terms
direct and perspicuous; opposed my doubts and prejudices with meek
reason; represented the condition of the worst of mankind as admitting
of hope,--that of the best, as implying warfare.

From the first month of my residence with Miss Mortimer I may date a new
era of my existence. My mind had received a new impulse, and new views
had opened to me of my actions, my situation, and my prospects. An
important step had been made towards a change in my character. But
still it was only a step. The tendencies of nature, strengthened by the
habits of seventeen years, remained to be overcome, and this was not the
work of a month, or a year. I was not, however, of a temper long to
endure the sense of helpless misery. Encouraged by the promises which
are made to the repentant, and guided now by the example which I had
once overlooked or ridiculed, I resolved to associate myself as much as
possible, in Miss Mortimer's acts of devotion and of charity. I joined
in her family worship,--I visited her pensioners,--and industriously
assisted her in working for the poor; an employment to which she
punctually devoted part of her time. Little did I then suspect how much
the value of the same action was varied by our different motives. She
laboured to please a Father,--I to propitiate a hard Master. She was
humbly offering a token of gratitude,--I was poorly toiling for a hire.

It was now that I began to feel the effects of my former habits of life.
While my feelings were in a state of strong excitement, they held the
place of the stimulants to which I had been accustomed; and I should
have turned in disgust from the trivial interests which had formerly
engaged me. But whenever my mind settled into its more natural state, I
became sensible of a vacancy,--a wearisome craving for an undefined
something to rouse and interest me. The great truths indeed which I had
lately discovered, often supplied this want; and I had only to turn my
newly acquired powers of sight towards my own character to be awakened
into strong emotion. But compared with my new standards, my own heart
offered a prospect so little inviting, that I turned from it as often as
I dared; endeavouring to 'lay the flattering unction to my soul,' by
wilfully mistaking the resolution to be virtuous for virtue itself.

The activity of my mind had hitherto been so unhappily directed, that it
now revolted from every impulse, except such as was either pleasurable
or of overwhelming force. Besides, although nothing be more sublime than
a life of charity and self-denial in the abstract, nothing is less so in
the detail. I was unused to difficulty, and therefore submitted with
impatience to difficulties which my own inexperience rendered more
numerous. Poverty I had known only as she is exhibited in the graceful
draperies of tragedy and romance; therefore I met her real form in all
its squalor and loathsomeness, with more, I fear, of disgust than of
pity. My imaginary poor had all been innocent and grateful. Short
experience in realities corrected this belief; and when I found among
the real poor the vices common to mankind, added to those which
peculiarly belong to a state of dependence,--when I found them selfish,
proud, and sensual, as well as cunning and improvident,--I almost forgot
that alms were never meant as a tribute to the virtues of man; and that
it is absurd to pretend compassion for the bodily necessities of our
fellow-creature, while we exercise none towards the more deplorable
wants of his mind. Not knowing, however, what spirit I was of, I called
my impatience of their defects a virtuous indignation; and witnessed,
with something like resentment, the moderation of Miss Mortimer, who
always viewed mental debasement as others do bodily decrepitude, with an
averseness which inclined her to withdraw her eye, but with a pity which
stretched forth her hand to help. Yet when I beheld the ignorance, the
miseries, the crimes of beings in whom I had now, in some degree, learnt
to reverence the character of immortality, how did I lament, that, with
respect to them, I had hitherto lived in vain! How did I reproach
myself, that, while thousands of sensitive and accountable creatures
were daily within the sphere of my influence, that influence had served
only to deepen, with additional shades, the blackness of human misery
and of human guilt.

Accident served to heighten this self-upbraiding. One day when Miss
Mortimer, with the assistance of my arm, was walking round her garden,
she observed a meagre, barefooted little girl; who, reaching her sallow
hand through the bars of the wicket, asked alms in a strong Caledonian
accent. My friend, who never dismissed any supplicant unheard, patiently
enquired into a tale which was rendered almost unintelligible by the
uncouth dialect and national bashfulness of the narrator. All that we
could understand from the child was, that she was starving, because her
father was ill, and her mother prevented from working, by attendance
upon an infant who was dying of the small-pox. Miss Mortimer, who always
conscientiously endeavoured to ascertain that the alms which she
subtracted from her own humble comforts were not squandered in
profligacy, accepted of my offer to examine into the truth of this
story; and I accompanied the child to the abode of her parents.

After the longest walk which I had ever taken, my conductress ushered me
into a low dark apartment in the meanest part of Greenwich. Till my eye
was accommodated to the obscurity, I could very imperfectly distinguish
the objects which surrounded me; and, for some minutes after leaving
the gladdening air of heaven, I could scarcely breathe the vapour
stagnant in the abode of disease and wretchedness. The little light
which entered through a window half filled with boards fell upon a
miserable pallet, where lay the emaciated figure of a man; his face
ghastly wan, till the exertion of a hollow cough flushed it with
unnatural red; and his eye glittering with the melancholy brightness
which indicates hopeless consumption.

Upon a low stool, close by the expiring embers, sat a woman, vainly
trying to still the hoarse cry of an infant. On my entrance, she started
up to offer me the only seat which her apartment contained; and the poor
Scotchman, with national courtesy to a superior, would have risen to
receive me,--but he was unable to move without help. His wife, that she
might be at liberty to assist him, called upon the little girl to take
charge of her brother. Startled at seeing an infant committed to such
care, I thoughtlessly offered my services; and held out my arms for the
child. The mother, evidently pleased with what she seemed to regard as
condescension, and not aware that the being whom she was fondly
caressing could be an object of disgust to others, held the child
towards me; but at the first glance I recoiled, with an exclamation of
horror, from a creature who scarcely retained a trace of human likeness.
That dreadful plague, which the most fortunate of discoveries now
promises to banish from the earth, had disguised, or rather concealed,
every feature; and, deprived of light, of nourishment, and rest, the
sufferer scarcely retained the power to express its misery in a hoarse
and smothered wailing. The poor woman, sensibly hurt by my expression of
disgust, shed tears, while she reminded me of the evanescent nature of
beauty, and enumerated all the charms of which a few days had deprived
her boy. I had wounded where I came to heal; and all my address could
scarcely atone for an error, that increased the difficulties which my
errand already found in the decent reserve of spirits unsubdued to
beggary, and in a dialect which I could very imperfectly comprehend.

What I at length learnt of the story of these poor people may be told in
a few words; the man was a gardener, who had been allured from his
country by the demand in England for Scotchmen of his trade. Unable to
procure immediate employment, he and his family had suffered much
difficulty; till, encouraged by the name of a countryman, they had
applied to Mr Maitland. By his interest, the man had obtained the
situation of under-gardener in Mr Percy's villa at Richmond.

I started at the name of my father, but having been often deceived, I
was become cautious; and, without betraying myself, asked whether they
had ever seen Miss Percy. The woman answered that they had not; having
entered on their service the same day that their master's family removed
to town. The evil influence of Miss Percy, however, had blasted all
their hopes and comforts. She had given peremptory orders that some
delicate exotics should be forced into flower to adorn an entertainment.
Poor Campbell, deputed to take care of them, watched them all night in
the hot-house; then walked two miles to his lodging through a thick
drift of snow; breathed ever afterwards with pain; struggled against
disease; wrought hard in the sharp mornings and chilly evenings of
spring; and, when my father could no longer repay his services, was
dismissed to die, unheeded by a mistress equally selfish in the
indulgence of her sorrow as in the thoughtlessness of her prosperity.

As I listened to this tale, I found it confirmed by circumstances which
admitted not of doubt. While I looked on the death-struck figure of
poor Campbell, saw the misery that surrounded me, and felt that it was
_my_ work, my situation was more pitiable than that of any mortal,
except him who can see that he has done irreparable injury, yet see it
without a pang. When I recovered utterance, I enquired whether Campbell
had any medical assistance?--a needless question; he had not wherewith
to purchase food, much less medicine.--'But if I were once able,
madam,' said he, 'to earn what would be our passage home, I should soon
be well,--the air in Scotland is so pure, and breathes so
pleasantly!'--'You shall get home, cost what it will,' cried I, and
instantly delivered the whole contents of my purse; without considering
that it could scarcely be called mine, and that it could be replenished
only from the scanty store of her whose generosity would fain, if
possible, have made me forget that I was no longer the rich Miss Percy.

Ignorant as I was of Greenwich and its inhabitants, I next undertook to
find medical advice. By enquiring at a shop, I obtained the address of a
Mr Sidney, to whom I immediately repaired. He was a young man of a very
prepossessing appearance, tall and handsome enough for a hero of
romance. Will it be believed that, in spite of the humbling sense of
guilt which in that hour was strong upon me, my besetting weakness made
me observe with pleasure the surprise and admiration with which my
appearance seemed to fill this stranger? But vanity, though powerful in
me, was no longer unresisted. I pulled my bonnet over my face; nor once
again looked up while I conducted Sidney to the abode of his new
patient.

I cannot express the horror which I felt, when, after examining the
situation of the poor man, Sidney informed me, in a whisper, that no aid
could save his life. I turned faint; and, to save myself from sinking to
the ground, retreated to the door for air. At that moment, I overheard
Sidney ask, 'Who is that angel?' and the term, applied to one who was
little less than a murderer, sharpened the stab of conscience. I hastily
turned to proclaim my name, and submit myself to the execrations of this
injured family; but I wanted courage for the confession, and the words
died upon my lips.

The disfigured infant next engaged Sidney's attention. He discovered
that the mother had, according to what I have since found to be the
custom of her country, aggravated the dreadful disease, by loading her
unhappy child with all the clothes she could command, and carefully
defending him from the fresh air. She had even deprived herself of food,
that she might procure ardent spirits, which she compelled the hapless
being to swallow; to drive, as she expressed it, 'the small-pox from his
heart.' Yet this poor woman, so ignorant of the treatment of the most
common disorder, possessed, as I afterwards found, a knowledge of the
principles of religion, and an acquaintance with the scope of its
doctrines and precepts, which, at that time, appeared to me very
wonderful in a person of her rank. They are, however, less surprising to
me since I became a denizen of Scotland.

But to close a tale, on which its strong impression on my mind has
perhaps made me dwell too long, the boy, by means of better treatment,
recovered; his father's disease was beyond the reach of human skill. One
day, while I was in the act of holding a cordial to his lips, he fell
back; and, with a momentary struggle, expired. The little ingenious
works which I had been taught at school, were, for the first time,
employed by me to a useful purpose, when his widow and children were
enabled, by the sale of them, to procure a passage to Scotland.

I cannot express the effect which this incident had upon my mind. A new
load of guilt seemed to oppress me. I perceived that actions and habits
might have tendencies unsuspected by the agent; that the influence of a
fault,--venial, perhaps, in the eyes of the transgressor,--might reach
the character and fate of those who are not within the compass of his
thoughts; and, therefore, that the real evil of sin could be known only
to Him, by whom effects which as yet exist not are traced through their
eternal course. Thus a fearful addition of 'secret sins' was made to all
those with which conscience could distinctly charge me; and my
examinations of my past conduct were like the descent into a dismal
cavern, where every step discloses some terrifying sight, and all that
is imperfectly distinguished in the gloom is imagined to be still more
appalling.

It is true, I had resolved upon a better course of life; but my
resolutions were very partially kept; nor, had it been otherwise, could
present submission atone for past disobedience. Even my best actions,
when weighed in the right balance, were 'found wanting,' and rather in
need of forgiveness than deserving of reward. My best efforts seemed but
the sacrifice of the ignorant Indian, who vows to his god an ingot of
gold, and then gilds a worthless offering to defraud him. Nor had they,
in truth, one vestige of real worth, void as they still were of that
which gives a value to things of small account. It is the fire from
heaven which distinguishes the acceptable sacrifice.

Who that had seen me under the depression which these convictions
occasioned could have imagined that I had entered on 'ways of
pleasantness,' and 'paths of peace?' Anxious and fearful,--seeking rest,
and finding none, because remaining pride prevented me from seeking it
where alone it was to be found,--I struggled hard to escape the
convictions which were forced upon my conscience. I opposed to the
truths of religion a hundred objections which had never before occurred
to me, only because the subject was new to my thoughts; and I
recollected an infinity of the silly jests, and ridiculous associations,
by which unhappy sinners try to hide from themselves the dignity of that
which they are predetermined to despise. I remember, with amazement,
Miss Mortimer's patience in replying to the oft-refuted objection;
oft-refuted, I say, because I am certain that far more ingenuity than I
can boast would be necessary to invent, upon this subject, a cavil which
has not been answered again and again. Far from desiring me, however, to
rely upon her authority, she recommended to me such books as she thought
likely to secure my rational assent to the truth; carefully reminding
me, at the same time, that they could do no more, and that mere rational
assent fell far short of that faith to which such mighty effects are
ascribed. The direct means of obtaining a gift, she said, was to ask it;
and faith she considered as a gift.

'To what purpose,' said I to her one day, after I had laboured through
Butler's Analogy, and Macknight's Truth of the Gospel History,--'to what
purpose should I perplex myself with these books, when you own that some
of the best Christians you have ever known were persons who had never
thought of reasoning upon the evidences of their faith?'--'Because, my
dear,' answered Miss Mortimer, 'the exercise of your highest natural
faculties upon your religion is calculated to fix it in your mind, and
endear it to your affections. It is true, that piety as pure and as
efficient as any I ever knew, I have witnessed in persons who had no
leisure, and perhaps no capacity for reasoning themselves into a
conviction of the historical truth of Christianity. The author of faith
is not bound to any particular method of bestowing his gift. He may, and
I believe often does, compensate for the means which he withholds; but
this gives no ground to suppose that he will make up for those which we
neglect.'

Through Miss Mortimer's persuasion, I steadily persevered in this line
of study; and, if my understanding possesses any degree of soundness or
vigour, it is to be attributed to this discipline. My education, if the
word signify learning what is afterwards to be useful, was now properly
beginning; and every day added something to my very slender stock of
information. My friend, who was herself no mean proficient in general
literature, encouraged me to devote many of my leisure hours to books of
instruction and harmless entertainment; and our evenings were commonly
enlivened by reading history, travels, or criticism.

Leisure, like other treasures, is best husbanded when it is least
abundant; and it was no longer entirely at my command. I still retained
enough of the spirit of Ellen Percy, to hold dependence in rather more
than Christian scorn,--yet to be ashamed of openly contributing to my
own subsistence. In how many shapes does our ruling passion assail us!
If we resist it in the form of vice, it will even put on the semblance
of virtue. I firmly believed at that time, that a virtuous motive alone
induced me to escape, by means of my own labour, from all necessity for
applying to the funds of Miss Mortimer; and I forgot to enquire into the
reason why my work was always privately done, and privately disposed of.

The manufacture of a variety of ingenious trifles now become useful by
ministering to my own wants and those of others,--the share I took in
Miss Mortimer's charitable employments,--hours of devotion and serious
study, reading, and often writing abstracts of what I read,--left no
portion of my time for weariness. But had I been deprived of all bodily
employment, the very condition of my mind precluded ennui. I was full of
one concern of overwhelming importance. At one time, the truth shone
upon me, gladdening me to rapture with its brightness; at another, error
darkened my sinking soul, and I was eager in my search for light. Alas!
our infirmity loads with many a cloud the dawning even of that true
light which 'shineth more and more unto the perfect day.' The natural
warmth of my temper, and my long-confirmed habit of yielding to all its
impulses, often hurried me into little superstitious austerities,
needless scruples, and vehement disputes, which, had they been exposed
to common eyes, would have drawn upon me the derision of some, and the
suspicion of others; but fortunately Miss Mortimer had few visiters, and
my foibles were little seen, except by one who could discover errors in
religious judgment, without imputing them either to fanaticism or
hypocrisy.

My altercations, for discourse in which passion is permitted to mingle
cannot deserve the name of argument, were chiefly carried on with
Sidney; who, from the time of his assistance to the Campbells, had
become a frequent guest at Miss Mortimer's. His dispositions were
amiable, his character unblemished; but his opinions upon some lesser
points of doctrine differed widely from mine. This he happened one day
accidentally to betray; and I, with the rashness which inclines us to
fancy all lately-discovered truths to be of equal importance, combated
what I considered as his fatal heresy. Sidney, with great good-humour,
rather excited me to speak; perhaps for the same reason as he taught his
dog to quarrel with him for his glove.

Miss Mortimer never took part in our disputations, not even by a look.
'How can you,' said I to her one day, when he had just left us, 'suffer
such opinions to be advanced without contradiction?'

'I am afraid of losing my temper,' answered she with an arch smile; 'and
that I am sure is forbidden in terms more explicit than Mr Sidney's
heresy.'

'And would you have me,' cried I, instantly sensible of the implied
reproof, 'seem to approve what I know to be false?'

'No, my dear,' returned Miss Mortimer; 'but perhaps you might disapprove
without disputing; and I think it is not obscurely hinted by the highest
authority, that the modest example of a Christian woman is likely to be
more convincing than her arguments. Besides, though we are most zealous
in our new opinions, we are most steady in our old ones; therefore I
believe, that, upon consideration, you will see it best to ensure your
steadiness for the present, and to husband your zeal for a time when it
will be more likely to fail.'

When I was cool, I perceived that my friend was in the right; and, by a
strong effort, I thenceforth forbore my disputes with Sidney; to which
forbearance it probably was owing, that he soon after became my declared
admirer.




CHAPTER XVII

    _Shift not thy colour at the sound of death!
    For death----
    Seems not a blank to me; a loss of all
    Those fond sensations,--those enchanting dreams,
    Which cheat a toiling world from day to day,
    And form the whole of happiness it knows.
    Death is to me perfection, glory, triumph!_

                                             Thomson.


Sidney's overtures cost me some hesitation. They were unquestionably
disinterested; and they were made with a plainness rather prepossessing
to one who had so lately experienced the hollowness of more flowery
profession. Nothing could be objected to his person, manners, or
reputation. Miss Mortimer's ill health rendered the protection I enjoyed
more than precarious. Honourable guardianship, and plain sufficiency,
offered me a tempting alternative to labour and dependence. But I was
not in love; and as I had no inclination to marry, I had leisure to see
the folly of entering upon peculiar and difficult duties, while I was
yet a novice in those which are binding upon all mankind. Sidney had,
indeed, by that natural and involuntary hypocrisy, which assumes for the
time the sentiments of a beloved object, convinced me that he was of a
religious turn of mind; and from his avowed heresies I made no doubt of
being able to reclaim him; but he wanted a certain masculine dignity of
character, which had, I scarcely knew how, become a _sine qua non_ in my
matrimonial views. These things considered, I decided against Sidney;
and it so happened, that this decision was formed in an hour after I had
received a long and friendly letter from Mr Maitland.

Now this letter did not contain one word of Maitland's former avowal;
nor one insinuation of affection, which might not, with equal propriety,
have been expressed by my grandmother. But it spoke a strong feeling for
my misfortunes; a kindly interest in my welfare; it represented the
duties and the advantages of my new condition; and reminded me, that, in
so far as independence is attainable by man, it belongs to every one who
can limit his desires to that which can be purchased by his labour.

'I see no advantage in being married,' said I, rousing myself from a
reverie into which I had fallen after the third reading of my letter.
'Mr Maitland can advise me as well as any husband could; and in ten or a
dozen years hence, I might make myself very useful to him too. I might
manage his household, and amuse him; and there could be nothing absurd
in that after we were both so old.'

'Not quite old enough for that sort of life, I am afraid,' said Miss
Mortimer, smiling. 'If, indeed, Mr Maitland were to marry, the woman of
his choice would probably be an invaluable protector to you.'

'Oh he won't marry. I am sure he will not; and I wonder, Miss Mortimer,
what makes you so anxious to dispose of all your favourites? For my
part, I hate to hear of people being married.'

I thought there was meaning in Miss Mortimer's half suppressed smile;
but she did not raise her eyes, and only answered good humouredly, that,
'indeed, all her matrimonial plans for the last twenty years had been
for others.'

Some expressions of curiosity on my part now drew from Miss Mortimer a
narrative of her uneventful life; which, as it is connected with the
little I knew of Mr Maitland's, and with the story of my mother's early
days, I shall give in my own words:--

Miss Mortimer and my mother were hereditary friends. Their fathers
fought side by side,--their mothers became widows together.--Together
the surviving parents retired to quiet neglect, and mutually devoted
themselves to the duties which still remained for them. Those which fell
to the lot of Mrs Warburton were the more difficult; for, while a
moderate patrimony placed the only child of her friend above dependence,
it was her task to reconcile to poverty and toil the high spirit of a
youth of genius; and to arm, for the rude encounters of the world, a
being to whom gentleness made them terrible, to whom beauty increased
their danger.

The splendid progress of young Warburton's education had been the boast
of his teachers,--the delight of his parents,--the pride, the only pride
of his sister's heart. But his father's death blasted the fair prospect.
The widow's pittance could not afford to her son the means of
instruction; and from the pursuit of knowledge,--the pleasures of
success,--and the hopes of distinction,--poor Warburton unwillingly
turned to earn, by the toil of the day, the support which was to fit him
for the toil of the morrow. Disgusted and desponding, he yet refrained
from aggravating by complaint the sorrows of his mother and his sister.
To Miss Mortimer, the companion of his childhood, he mourned his
disappointed ambition, and was heard with sympathy; he deplored the
failure of hopes more interesting, and won something more than pity.

In the counting-house, which was the scene of his cheerless labour, he
found, however, a friend; and Maitland, though nearly seven years
younger than he, gained first his respect, and then his affection.

Maitland, while thus in age a boy, was a tall, vigorous, hardy
mountaineer. His nerves had been braced by toilsome exercise and
inclement skies; his strong mind had gained power under a discipline
which allowed no other rest than change of employment. He had left his
native land, and renounced his paternal home, in compliance with the
will of his parents, and the caprice of his uncle, who, upon these
conditions, offered him the reversion of a splendid affluence. His
country he remembered with the virtuous partiality which so strongly
distinguishes, and so well becomes, her children. Of his paternal home
he seldom spoke. Silent and shy, he escaped the smile of vulgar scorn,
which would have avenged the confession that the bribes of fortune
poorly repaid the endearments of brethren and friends; that all the
charms of spectacle and song could not please like the rude verse which
first taught him the legends of a gallant ancestry; that all the
treasures of art he would have gladly exchanged for permission to bend
once more from the precipice which no foot but his had ever dared to
climb, or linger once more in the valley whose freshness had rewarded
his first infant adventure. Curiosity is feeble in the busy and the gay.
No one asked, no one heard the story of Maitland's youth; and Warburton
alone knew the full cost of a sacrifice too great and too painful to be
made a theme with strangers. Maitland the elder, retaining his national
prejudice in favour of a liberal education, permitted his nephew to
pursue and enlarge his studies under the inspection of a man of sense
and learning; designing to send him at a proper age to the university.
Meanwhile he required him to spend a few hours daily in attendance upon
his future profession.

In Maitland, young as he was, Warburton found a companion who could task
his mind to its full strength. In classical acquirements, Maitland was
already little inferior to his friend; and, if he had less imagination,
he had more acuteness and sagacity. Enduring in quiet scorn the derision
which his provincial accent excited in the sharers of his humbler
lessons, he was pleased to find in Warburton manners more congenial with
his own habits. The young scholars had subjects of mutual interest in
which the others could not sympathise. The few hours which Maitland
spent daily in the counting-house, alone broke the dull monotony of
Warburton's labour; and Warburton alone listened with the enthusiasm
which unlocks the heart, to Maitland's descriptions of his native
scenes, of torrents roaring from the precipice, and woods dishevelled by
the storm. They became friends, and Warburton confided his lost hopes,
and bewailed the untimely close of his attainments. The hardier mind of
Maitland suggested a remedy for the evil. He advised his friend to earn
by severer toil, and to save by stricter parsimony, a fund which might
in time afford the advantage of a college life. From that hour he
himself gave the example of the toil and the parsimony which he
recommended. He abridged his rest, he renounced his recreations for the
drudgery of translating for a bookseller. The allowance which he had
been accustomed to spend, he hoarded with a miser's care. He was invited
to share the pleasures of his companions, and resolutely refused. He
listened to hints of his penurious temper, and deigned no other answer
than a smile. But, when he was better known, few were so unprincipled as
to find in him the subject of a jest, and fewer still so daring as to
betray their scorn; for Maitland possessed, even then, qualities which
ensure command,--integrity which no bribe could warp,--decision which
feared no difficulty,--penetration which admitted of no disguise. After
two years of silent perseverance, he presented to his friend the fruits
of his self-denial, and was more than recompensed when Warburton
accompanied him to Oxford.

It was a few months before the completion of this arrangement, that Mr
Percy, taking shelter from a shower in a parish church at the hour of
morning prayer, was captivated by the beauty, the modesty, and the
devotion of Frances Warburton. He followed her home; obtained an
introduction; and soon made proposals, with little form and much
liberality. Frances shrunk from her new lover; for a difference of
thirty years in their ages was the least point of their dissimilarity.
The lover, sensible of no disparity but such as a settlement might
counterbalance, enlarged his offers. He would have scorned to let any
expectation outgo his liberality. He promised competence for life to her
mother, and Frances faltered in her refusal. Mrs Warburton did not use
direct persuasion; but she sometimes lamented to her daughter that
poverty should mar the promise of her Edmund's genius. 'Had he but one
friend,' said she, 'even one to encourage or assist him, he would yet be
the glory of my old age.'--'He shall have a friend,' returned the
weeping Frances;--and she married Mr Percy.

But the sacrifice was unavailing. Young Warburton was not destined to
need such aid as riches can give, nor to attain such advancement as
riches can buy. His constitution, already broken by confinement, was
unequal to his more willing exertions; yet, insensible to his danger, he
pursued his enticing bane; rejected the friendly warning which told him
that he was labouring his life away; and was one morning found dead in
his study; the essay lying before him which was that day to have
introduced him to fame and fortune.

Miss Mortimer and her friend suffering together, became the more
endeared to each other. My mother, indeed, had found a new object of
interest; and she transferred a part, perhaps too large a part, of her
widowed affections to her child. Miss Mortimer raised hers to a better
world; and recalled them to this fleeting scene no more.

Maitland, defended from the dangers of a university by steady principles
and habits of application, passed safely, even at Oxford, the perilous
years between boyhood and majority; then turned his attention to studies
more peculiarly belonging to his intended profession. He visited the
greatest commercial cities upon the Continent; conversed with the most
enlightened of their merchants; and, far from limiting his inquiries to
the mere means of gain, he embraced in his comprehensive mind all the
mutual relations and mutual benefits of trading nations. At the age of
twenty-five he returned home, to take a principal share in the direction
of one of the greatest mercantile houses in Britain. Before he was
thirty, the death of his uncle had put him in possession of a noble
independence, and left him chief partner in a concern which promised to
realise the wildest dreams of avarice. But the love of wealth had no
place in Maitland's soul. A small part of his princely revenue sufficed
for one whose habits were frugal, whose pleasures were simple, whose
tastes were domestic. The remainder stole forth in many a channel; like
unseen rills, betraying its course only by the riches which it brought.

Awake, as he ever was, to the claims of justice and humanity, it was not
personal interest that could shield the slave trade from the reprobation
of Maitland. He conquered his retiring nature that, in the senate of his
country, he might lend his testimony against this foulest of her crimes;
and when that senate stilled the general cry with a poor promise of
distant reform, he blushed for England and for human kind. Somewhat of
the same honest shame he felt at the recollection that he was himself
the proprietor of many hundreds of his fellow-creatures; and when he
found that his public exertions in their cause did not avail, he braved
the danger of a pestilent climate to mitigate the evil which he could
not cure, and to gain, by personal investigation, knowledge which might
yet be useful in better times.

Such was Maitland. I dwell upon his character with mingled pleasure and
regret: pleasure, perhaps, not untainted with womanly vanity; regret,
that, when I might have shared the labours, the virtues, the love of his
noble soul, a senseless vanity made me cold to his affection,--a mean
coquetry wrecked me in his esteem! I might once, indeed, have bound him
to me for ever; but it was now plain that he had cast off his inglorious
shackles. Although I answered his letter, he showed no intention of
continuing our correspondence, and to Miss Mortimer he noticed me only
as a common friend; nor did he ever mention his return to Britain as
likely to take place before the lapse of many years.

Warned by the consequences of my past folly, and beginning now to act,
however imperfectly, by the only rule which will ever lead us to uniform
justice, I had no sooner formed my resolution in regard to Sidney, than
I gave him an opportunity of learning my sentiments. I will not deny
that this cost me an effort, for I was afraid of losing a pleasant
acquaintance; and besides, as the young gentleman was sentimentally in
love, his little anxieties and tremours were really, in spite of myself,
amusing. But vanity, though unconquerably rooted in me by nature and
habit, was no longer overlooked as a venial error. I struggled against
it, as a part of that selfish, earth-born spirit, which was altogether
inconsistent with my new profession, and which except at the moment of
temptation, seemed now too despicable to bias the actions even of an
infant. Sidney was a man of sense; and therefore, by a very few efforts
of firmness I convinced him that he could be nothing more.

Nor did the explanation occasion even a temporary suspension of our
intercourse. Unfortunately, his professional visits were become
necessary to Miss Mortimer; and with me he had long before started a
topic, amply compensating that which I had interdicted. He had an
excellent chemical library, and a tolerable apparatus. By means of
these, and a degree of patience not to be expected from any man but a
lover, he contrived to initiate me into the first rudiments of a
science, which has no detriment except its unbounded power of enticing
those who pursue it. By informing me what I might read with advantage,
he saved me the time which I might have lost in making the discovery
myself; and though he had not always leisure to watch my progress, he
could direct me what to attempt. After all, it must be confessed that my
attainments in chemistry were contemptible; but even this feeble
beginning of a habit of patient enquiry was invaluable. Besides, in the
course of my experiments, I made a discovery infinitely more important
to me than that of latent heat or galvanism; namely, that the prospect
of exhibition is not necessary to the interest of study.

Nothing is more important in its issue, nothing more dull in relation,
than a life of quiet and regular employment. A narrative of my first
year's residence with Miss Mortimer would be a mere detail of feelings
and reflections, mixed with confessions of a thousand instances of
rashness, impatience, and pride. My original blemishes were still
conspicuous enough to establish my identity; yet one momentous change
had taken place, for those blemishes were no longer unobserved or
wilful. I had become more afraid of erring than of seeing my
error,--more anxious to escape from my faults than from my conscience.
Not that her rebukes were become more gentle: on the contrary, an
unutterable sense of depravity and ingratitude was added to my
self-accusings; for, in receiving the forgiveness of a father, I had
awakened to the feelings of a child, and in every act of disobedience I
sinned against all the affections of my soul. Let it not be objected to
religion, if my judgment was disproportioned to the force of sentiments
like these; and if, though no devotion can be extravagant in its degree,
mine was sometimes indiscreet in its expression. The fault lay in my
education, not in my faith. Christianity justly claims for her own the
'spirit of a sound mind;' but that spirit dwells most frequently with
those whose devout feelings have been accustomed to find their chief
vent in virtuous actions.

My walk happened one day to lead near a dissenting chapel; and the
eagerness to hear which characterises recent converts made me join the
multitude who thronged the entrance. 'The truth,' thought I, 'is
despised by the gay and the giddy; but to me it shall be welcome, come
when it will.' Was there nothing pharisaical in the temper of this
welcome? In spite, however, of the liberality for which I was applauding
myself, my expectations were influenced by my early prejudices; and I
presupposed the preacher, zealous indeed, but loud, stern, and
inelegant. Surprise, therefore, added force to my impressions. The
unadorned pulpit was occupied by a youth not yet in his prime, nor
destined, as it seemed, ever to reach that period. The bloom of youth
had given place in his countenance to a wandering glow, that came and
went with the mind's or the body's fever. His bright blue eyes--now cast
down in humility, now flashing with rapturous hope--had never shone with
less gentle fires. His manner had the mild seriousness of entreaty,--his
composition the careless vigour of genius; or rather the eloquence of
one, who, feeling the essential glory of truth, thinks not of decking
her with tinsel.

Reasoning must convince the understanding, and a power which neither
human reasoning nor human eloquence can boast must bend the will to
goodness; but that which comes from the heart will, for a time at least,
reach the heart. Mine was strongly moved. The novel simplicity of
form,--the fervour of extemporary prayer,--the zeal of the youthful
teacher, his faithful descriptions of a debasement which I strongly
felt, his unqualifying application of the only medicine which can
minister to this mortal disease,--roused me at once to all the energy of
passion. I abhorred the coldness of my ordinary convictions; and,
compared with what I now felt, disparaged the impression of regular
instruction. I forgot, or I had yet to learn, that the genuine spirit of
the Gospel is described as the 'spirit of peace,' not of rapture; that
the heavenly weapon is not characterised as dazzling us with its lustre,
but as 'bringing into captivity every thought.' Feeling an increase of
heat, I rashly inferred that I had received an accession of light; and
immediately resolved to join the favoured congregation of a pastor so
useful.

My recollection of the prejudice which confounds in one undistinguishing
charge of fanaticism many thousands of virtuous and sober-minded persons
rather strengthened that resolution; for fire and faggot are not the
only species of persecution which arms our natural feelings on the side
of the suffering cause. I gloried in the thought of sharing contempt
for conscience-sake; and longed with more, it must be owned, of zeal
than of humility, to enter upon this minor martyrdom.

That very evening I announced my purpose to my friend, in a tone of
premature triumph. Miss Mortimer was so habitually averse to
contradicting, that I was obliged to interpret into dissent the grave
silence in which she received my communication. Dissent I might have
borne, but not such dissent as barred all disputation; and I entered on
a warm defence of my sentiments, as if they had been attacked. Miss
Mortimer waited the subsiding of that part of my warmth which belonged
to mere temper; then gave a mild but firm opinion. 'It had been
allowed,' she told me, 'by an author of equal candour and acuteness,
that "there is, perhaps, no establishment so corrupt as not to make the
bulk of mankind better than they would be without it." Our countenance,
therefore,' she said, 'to the establishment of the country in which we
lived was a debt we owed to society; unless, indeed, the higher duty
which we owed to God were outraged by the doctrines of the national
church. As for mere form, it had always,' she said, 'appeared to her
utterly immaterial, except as it served to express or to strengthen
devotion; therefore, it seemed unnecessary to forsake a ritual which had
been found to answer these purposes. If the ordinances, as administered
by our church, were less efficacious to me than they had been to others,
she would wish me to examine whether this were not owing to some
unobserved error in my manner of using them; but if, after diligent
attention, humble self-examination, and earnest prayer for guidance, I
continued to find the national worship unsuitable to my particular case,
she might regret, but she could not condemn, my secession; since I
should then be not only privileged, but bound, to forsake her
communion.'

The time was not long past, since even this mild resistance would have
only confirmed me in a favourite purpose; but I was becoming less
confident in my own judgment, and Miss Mortimer's consistent worth had
established an influence over me beyond even that to which my
obligations entitled her. Though her natural abilities were merely
respectable, her opinions upon every point of duty had such precision
and good sense that, without being aware of it, I leant upon her
judgment of right and wrong, as naturally as the infant trusts his first
unsteady steps to his mother's sustaining hand. She prevailed upon me to
pause, ere I forsook the forms in which my fathers had worshipped; and
though her own principle has since connected me with a church of
simpler government and ritual, I have never seen reason to repent of the
delay.

And now, deprived as I was of all the baubles which I had once imagined
necessary to comfort, almost to existence, I was nearer to happiness
than I had ever been while in the full enjoyment of all that pleasure,
wealth, and flattery can bestow; for I now possessed all the materials
of such happiness as this state of trial admits,--good health, constant
employment, the necessaries of this life, and the steady hope of a
better. And let the lover of pleasure, the slave of Mammon, the sage who
renounces the light of heaven for the spark which himself has kindled,
smile in scorn whilst I avow, that I at times felt rapture, compared
with which their highest triumph of success is tame. I can bear the
smile, for I know that they are compelled to mingle it with a sigh; that
they envy the creature whom they affect to scorn; and wish--vainly wish,
that they could choose the better part.

The bitter drop which is found in every cup, was infused into mine by
the increasing illness of Miss Mortimer; and by a strong suspicion, that
poverty aggravated to her the evils of disease. This latter
circumstance, however, was conjectural; for Miss Mortimer, though
confidingly open with me upon every other subject, was here most
guarded. From the restraint visibly laid upon inclinations which I knew
to be liberal in the extreme,--from my friend's obstinate refusal to
indulge in any of the little luxuries which sickness and debility
require,--from many trifles which cannot evade the eye of an inmate, I
began to form conjectures which I soon accidentally discovered to be but
too well founded. A gentleman happened to make a visit of business to
Miss Mortimer one day when she was too much indisposed to receive him;
and he incautiously committed to me a message for her, by which I
discovered, that her whole patrimony had been involved in the ruin of my
father; that, except the income of the current year, which she had
fortunately rescued a few weeks before the wreck, she had lost all;
that, while she made exertions beyond her strength to seek and to
comfort me, while she soothed my sullen despair, she was herself
shrinking before the gaunt aspect of poverty; and that, while she
contrived for me indulgences which she denied to herself, her generous
soul abhorred to divulge what might have rendered my feeling of
dependence more painful.

When the certainty of all this burst upon me, I felt as if I had been in
some sort responsible for the injury which my father had inflicted; and,
overwhelmed with a sense of most undeserved obligation, I almost sunk
to the ground. The moment I recovered myself, I flew to my friend, and
with floods of tears, and the most passionate expressions of gratitude,
I protested that I would no longer be a burden upon her generosity; and
besought her to consider of some situation in which I might earn my
subsistence. But Miss Mortimer resisted my proposal upon grounds which I
felt it impossible to dispute. 'I cannot spare you yet, my dear child,'
said she. 'I have been assured, that in a very few months you must be at
liberty; but you will not leave me yet!--you will not leave me to die
alone.'

This was the first intimation which I had received of the inevitable
fate of one whose gentle virtues and unwearied kindness had centered in
herself all my widowed affections; and it wholly overpowered the
fortitude which not an hour before I had thought invincible. I hurried
from human sight, while I mingled with bitter cries a passionate
entreaty, that I might suffer any thing rather than the loss of my only
friend. We often ask in folly; but we are answered in wisdom. The decree
was gone forth; and no selfish entreaties availed to detain the saint
from her reward. When the first emotions were past, I saw, and
confessed, that a petition such as mine, clothed in whatever language,
was wanting in the very nature of prayer; which has the promise of
obtaining what we need, not of extorting what we desire.

In the present situation of my friend, it was impossible for me to
forsake her; yet I could not endure to feel myself a burden upon the
little wreck which the misfortunes or imprudence of my family had left
her. Hour after hour I pondered the means of making my labour answer to
my subsistence. But there my early habits were doubly against me.
Accustomed to seek in trifling pastimes relaxation from employment
scarcely less trifling, perseverance in mere manual industry was to me
almost impossible. Habituated to confound the needful with the
desirable, I had no idea how large a proportion of what we think
necessary to the decencies of our station belongs solely to the wants of
our fancy. My highest notion of economy in dress went no farther than
the relinquishing of ornament; therefore, all my little works of
ingenuity were barely sufficient to supply my own wardrobe, and another
channel of expense which I had of late learnt to think at least as
necessary. I saw no means, therefore, of escaping my dependence upon
Miss Mortimer. Yet it made me miserable to think, that, for my sake, she
must deny herself the necessaries of decaying life.

My heart gave a bound as my eye chanced to be caught by the sparkle of
my mother's ring, and I recollected that its value might relieve my
unwilling pressure upon my friend. But when I had looked at it till a
thousand kindly recollections rose to my mind, my courage failed; and I
thought it impossible to part with the memorial of my first and fondest
attachment. Again my obligations to Miss Mortimer,--the rights of my
mother's friend,--the dread of subtracting from the few comforts of a
life which was so soon to close, upbraided my reluctance to sacrifice a
selfish feeling; but a casuistry, which has often aided me against
disagreeable duty, made me judge it best to act deliberately; and thus
to defer indefinitely what I could neither willingly do, nor peacefully
leave undone.

My decision, however, was hastened by one of those accidents which, I am
ashamed to say, have determined half the actions of my life. The next
morning, as I was reading to Miss Mortimer in her ground parlour, a
woman came to the window offering for sale a basket of beautiful fruit.
Fruit had been recommended as a medicine to my friend. I fancied, too,
though perhaps it was only fancy, that she looked wistfully at it; and
when she turned away without buying any, the scalding tears rushed to my
eyes. Hastily producing the money which I had privately received for
some painted screens, I heaped all the finest fruit before Miss
Mortimer; and when, in spite of her mild remonstrances, I had laid out
almost my whole fortune, I was seized with a sudden impatience to visit
London; and thither I immediately went, promising to return before
night.

I began my journey with a heavy heart. A stage-coach, the only
conveyance suited to my circumstances, was quite new to me; and I shrunk
with some alarm from companions, much like those usually to be met with
in such vehicles, vulgar, prying, and communicative. Finding, however,
that they offered me no incivility, I re-assured myself; and began to
consider what price I was likely to obtain for my ring, and how I might
best present my offering to Miss Mortimer. The first of these points I
settled more agreeably to my wishes than to truth; the second was still
undetermined when the coach stopped. Then I first recollected, that,
with my usual inconsiderateness, I had not left myself the means of
hiring a conveyance through the town. I had therefore no choice but to
walk alone in some of the most crowded streets of the city.

And now I had some cause for the alarm that seized me, for I was more
than once boldly accosted; and, ere I reached the shop where I intended
to offer my ring, I was so thoroughly discomposed, that I entered
without observing an equipage of the De Burghs at the door.

The shop was full of gay company; but one figure alone fixed my
attention. It was that of my heartless friend. I recoiled like one who
treads upon a serpent. My first impulse was to fly; but ere I had time
to retreat, a deadly sickness arrested my steps; and I stood motionless
and crouching towards the earth, as if struck by the power of the
basilisk. A person belonging to the shop, who came to enquire my
commands, seeing me, I suppose, ready to sink, offered me a chair; upon
which I unconsciously dropped, still unable to withdraw my gaze from my
apostate friend. Presently I almost started from my seat as her eye met
mine. Her deepening colour alone told that she recognized me; for she
instantly turned away.

Indignation now began to displace the stupor which had seized me. 'Shall
I let this unfeeling creature see,' thought I, 'that she has power to
move me thus? Or shall I tamely slink away, as if it were I who should
dread the glance of reproach?--as if it were I who had stabbed the heart
which trusted me?' My breast swelling with pain, pride, and resentment,
I arose; and walking across the shop with steps as stately as if I had
been about to purchase all the splendours it contained, I began to
transact the business which brought me thither. My attention, however,
was so much pre-occupied, that I was scarcely sensible of surprise when
the jeweller named five-and-twenty pounds as the price of my ring; a sum
less than one third of what I had expected.

I now perceived that Miss Arnold accompanied Lady Maria de Burgh. They
talked familiarly together, and I was probably their subject; for Lady
Maria stared full upon me, though her companion did not venture another
glance towards the spot where I stood. Not satisfied with her arrogant
scrutiny, Lady Maria, as if curious to know whether I were the buyer or
the seller, made some pretence for approaching close to me, though
without any sign of recognition. I had a hundred times abjured my enmity
to Lady Maria. I had wept over it as ungrateful, unchristian. In
cool-blooded solitude I had vowed a hundred times, that, having been
forgiven a debt of ten thousand talents, I would never more wrangle for
trifles with my fellow-servants. But when I was fretted with the insults
of strangers, and sore with the unkindness of my early friend, when
perhaps my pride was wounded by the circumstances in which she was about
to detect me, her Ladyship's little impertinence, attacking me on the
weak side, stirred at once the gall of my temper. Suspending a bargain
which, indeed, I did not wish her to witness, 'Pray,' said I to the
shopman, 'attend in the first place to that lady's business; if indeed
she has any except to pry into mine.'

Lady Maria, who knew by experience that she was no match for me in a war
of words, muttered something, and retreated, tossing her pretty head
with disdain. Eager to be gone, I closed with the offer which had been
made for my ring; and after delays which I thought almost endless, had
received my money, and was about to depart, when Miss Arnold, who was in
close conversation with her companion, in a distant part of the shop,
suddenly advanced, as if with an intention to accost me. I was
breathless with agitation and resentment. 'I will be cool, scornfully
cool,' thought I; 'I will show her that I can forget all my long-tried
affection, and remember only----' I turned away, and remembrance wrung
tears from me. But the formal effrontery with which she addressed me
restored in a moment my fortitude and my indignation. She excused
herself for not speaking to me sooner, by asserting that she 'really had
not observed me.'

Scorning the paltry falsehood, 'That is no wonder, Miss Arnold,'
answered I, 'for I am much lessened since you saw me last.'

I was moving away; but Miss Arnold, who had probably received her
instructions, detained me. 'Do stay a few minutes,' said she coaxingly,
'I have a great deal to say to you. Lady Maria will be here for an hour,
for she and Glendower are choosing their wedding finery; so if you lodge
any way hereabouts, I can take the carriage and set you down.'

The days of my credulous inadvertence were past; and, at once perceiving
the drift of this proposal, I answered with ineffable scorn, 'If you or
Lady Maria have any curiosity to know my present situation, you may be
gratified without hazarding your reputation by being seen with a
runaway. I live with Miss Mortimer.'

I think Miss Arnold had the grace to blush, but I did not wait to
examine. I hurried away; threw myself into the first hackney coach I
could find; and returned home, exhausted and dispirited. I was
dissatisfied with myself. The time had been when I should have thought
the impertinence of a rival, the cool effrontery and paltry cunning of
Miss Arnold, sufficient justification of any degree of resentment or
contempt; but now I needed only the removal of temptation to remind me
how unsuitable were scorn and anger to the circumstances of one who was
herself so undeservedly, so lately, and still so imperfectly reclaimed.
I firmly resolved, that if ever I should again meet Miss Arnold or her
new protectress, I should treat them with that cool, guarded courtesy
which is the unalienable right of all human kind. The strength of this
resolution was not immediately tried. All my resentments had time to
subside before I again saw or heard of my false friend.

Indeed, my seclusion now became more complete than ever; for Miss
Mortimer's malady, the increase of which she had hitherto endeavoured to
conceal from me, suddenly became so severe as to baffle all disguise.
Yet it was no expression of impatience which betrayed her. For four
months I scarcely quitted her bed-side, by day or by night. During this
long protracted season of suffering, neither cry nor groan escaped her.
Often have I wiped the big drops of agony from her forehead; but she
never complained. She was more than patient; the settled temper of her
mind was thankfulness. The decay of its prison-house seemed only to give
the spirit a foretaste for freedom. Timid by nature, beyond the usual
fearfulness of her sex, she yet endured pain, not with the iron
contumacy of a savage, but with the submission of filial love. The
approach of death she watched more in the spirit of the conqueror than
the victim; yet she expressed her willingness to linger on till
suffering should have extinguished every tendency to self-will, and
helplessness should have destroyed every vestige of pride. Her desire
was granted. Her trials brought with them an infallible token that they
came from a Father's hand; for her character, excellent as it had
seemed, was exalted by suffering; and that which in life was lovely, was
in death sublime.

At last, the great work was finished. Her education for eternity was
completed; and, from the severe lessons of this land of discipline, she
was called to the boundless improvement, the intuitive knowledge, the
glorious employments of her Father's house. One morning, after more than
ordinary suffering, I saw her suddenly relieved from pain; and, grasping
at a deceitful hope, I looked forward to no less than years of her
prolonged life. But she was not so deceived. With pity she beheld my
short-sighted reasoning. 'Dear child,' said she, 'must that sanguine
spirit cheat thee to the end? Think not now of wishing for my
life,--pray rather that my death may profit thee.' She paused for a
moment, and then added emphatically, 'Do you not every morning pray for
a blessing on the events which _that day_ will produce?'

Long as I had anticipated this sentence, it was more than I could bear.
'This day! this very day!' I cried. 'It cannot,--it shall not be. It is
sinful in you thus to limit your days! this very day! oh, I will not
believe it;' and I threw myself upon my friend's death-bed in an agony
which belied my words.

She gently reproved my vehemence. 'Ellen, my dear Ellen, my friend, my
comforter, how can you lament my release? Your affection has been a
blessing in my time of trial,--will you let it disturb the hour of my
rejoicing? Had I been necessary to you, my child, I hope I could have
wished for your sake to linger here; but "one thing"--only one--"is
needful." That one you have received,--and when the light of heaven has
risen upon you, can you mourn, that one feeble spark is darkened?'

The physicians, whom I sent in haste to summon, came only to confirm her
prediction. She forced them to number the hours she had to live; and
heard with a placid smile that the morning's sun would rise in vain for
her. She bade farewell to them and to her attendants, bestowing, with
her own hand, some small memorial upon each; then gently dismissed all,
except myself and the hereditary servant who had grown old with her, and
who now watched the close of a life which she had witnessed from its
beginning. 'I saw her baptism,' said the faithful creature to me, the
big tears rolling down her furrowed face, 'and now--but it is as the
Lord will.'

By my dying friend's own desire, she was visited by the clergyman upon
whose ministry she had attended; and with him she conversed with her
accustomed serenity, directing his attention to some of her own poor,
who were likely to become more destitute by her loss; and affectionately
commending to his care the unfortunate girl whom her death was to cast
once more friendless upon the world.

While he read to her the office for the sick, she listened with the
steady attention of a mind in its full strength. When he came to the
words, 'Thou hast been my hope from my youth!'--'Yes!' said she; 'He has
indeed been my hope from my youth. He blessed the prayers and the
labours of my parents, so that I never remember a time when I could rest
in any other trust; yet, till now, I never knew that hope in its full
strength and brightness.' Then laying her hand, now chill with the damps
of death, upon my arm, she said with great energy, 'Ellen, I trust I can
triumphantly appeal to you whether our blessed faith brings not comfort
unspeakable;--but how strong, how suitable, how glorious its
consolations are, you will never know, till, like me, you are bereft of
all others, and, like me, find them sufficient, when all others fail.'

Towards evening her voice became feeble, she breathed with pain, and all
her bodily powers seemed to decay. But that which was heaven-born was
imperishable. The love of God and man remained unshaken. Complaining
that her mind was grown too feeble to form a connected prayer, she bade
me repeat to her the triumphant strains in which David exults in the
care of the Good Shepherd. When I had ended, 'Yes,' said she; 'He knows
how to comfort me in the dark valley, for He has trod it before me;--and
what am I that I should die amidst the cares of kind friends, and He
amidst the taunts of his enemies! Ellen your mind is entire;--thank Him,
thank Him fervently for me, that I am mercifully dealt with.'

As I knelt down to obey her, she laid her hand upon my head as if to
bless me. At first, she repeated after me the expressions which pleased
her, afterwards single words, then, after a long interval, the name of
Him in whom she trusted. When I rose from my knees, her eyes were
closed,--the hand which had been lifted in prayer was sunk upon her
breast. A smile of triumph lingered on her face. It was the beam of a
sun that had set. The saint had entered into rest.




CHAPTER XVIII

        _----She hath ta'en farewell.----
    Upon her hearth the fire is dead,
    The smoke in air hath vanished.
    The last long lingering look is given;
    The shuddering start! the inward groan!
    And the pilgrim on her way is gone._

                                             John Wilson.


As I tore myself from the remains of my friend, I felt that I had
nothing more to lose. My soul, which had so obstinately clung to the
earth, had no longer whereon to fix her hold. Words cannot describe the
moment when, having assisted in the last sad office of woman, I was led
from the chamber of death to wander through my desolate dwelling. Man
cannot utter what I felt when I left the grave of my friend, and turned
me to the solitary wilderness again.

Yet even the agony of my grief had no likeness to the stern horror which
had once overwhelmed my soul. I was in sorrow indeed, but not in
despair; I was lonely, but not forsaken. My interests in this scene of
things were shaken,--were changed,--but not annihilated; for the world
can never be a desert while gladdened by the sensible presence of its
Maker; nor life be a blank to one who acts for eternity. The mere effort
to become resigned, forbade the listlessness of despair; and even
partial success gave some relief from uniformity of anguish. But I was
new to the lesson of resignation, and as yet faintly imbued with that
spirit which accepts with filial thankfulness the chastisements of a
father. The accents of submission were choked by those of sorrow; and
when I tried to say, 'Thy will be done,' I could only bow my head and
weep.

It was not till the first bitterness of grief was past, that I
recollected all the cause I had to grieve. My first feeling of
desolateness was scarcely heightened by the reflection, that I was once
more cast upon the world without refuge or means of subsistence. A few
days after the death of my friend, her legal heir arrived to assert his
rights; and the will by which she had intended to secure in her cottage
a shelter for her old servant and myself was too informal to entitle us
to resist his more valid claim. The will was written with Miss
Mortimer's own hand, and expressed with all the touching solemnity of a
last address to the object of strong affection. To resist it, seemed to
me an instance of almost impious hardness of heart; and when the heir,
fretted perhaps by finding his inheritance fall so far below his
expectations, gave me notice, that I must either purchase the remainder
of the lease, or, within a month, seek another habitation, I resolved
that I would owe nothing to the forbearance of a being so callous;--that
I would instantly resign to him whatever the relentless law made his
own.

But whither could I go? I was as friendless as the first outcast that
was driven forth a wanderer. I had no claim of gratitude, relationship,
or intimacy on any living being. The few friends of my mother who had
visited me after my return from school, I had neglected as persons of a
character too grave, and of habits too retiring for the circle in which
I desired to move. In that circle, a few months had sufficed to procure
me some hundreds of acquaintances; ages probably would not have
furnished me with one friend. My own labour, therefore, was now become
my only means of obtaining shelter or subsistence; and, foreign as the
effort was to all my habits, the struggle must be made. But how was I to
direct my attempts? What channel had the customs of society left open to
the industry of woman? The only one which seemed within my reach was the
tuition of youth; and I felt myself less dependent when I recollected my
thorough knowledge of music, and my acquaintance with other arts of
idleness. When, indeed, I considered how small a part of the education
of a rational and accountable being I was after all fitted to undertake,
I shrunk from the awful responsibility of the charge, and I fear pride
was still more averse to the task than principle; but there seemed no
alternative, and my plan was fixed.

To enter on a state of dependence amidst scenes which had witnessed my
better fortunes,--to be recognised in a condition little removed from
servitude by those who had seen me at the summit of prosperity,--to
meet scorn in the glances of once envious rivals,--and pity in the eye
of once rejected lovers, would have furnished exercise for more humility
than I had yet attained. Almost the first resolution which I formed on
the subject was, that the scene of my labours should be far distant from
London. Other circumstances in the situation which I was about to seek,
I determined not to weigh too fastidiously; for though the most
ambiguous praise from a person of fashion is often thought sufficient
introduction to the most momentous of trusts, I had seen enough of the
world to know, that it would be difficult to obtain the office of a
teacher upon the mere strength of my acquaintance with what I pretended
to teach; and I was resolved to owe no recommendation to any of those
summer friends, by whom I seemed now utterly neglected and forgotten.

To the clergyman, whose compassion my dying friend had claimed for me, I
explained my situation and my purpose. He showed me every kindness which
genuine benevolence could dictate,--offered to write in my behalf to a
married sister settled in a remote part of the kingdom,--and invited me
to reside in his family till I found a preferable situation.

Meanwhile, a most unexpected occurrence placed me beyond the reach of
immediate want. Among Miss Mortimer's papers was found a sealed packet
addressed to me. It enclosed a bank-bill for 300_l._; and in the
envelope these words were written:--

     'My dear Ellen, use the enclosed sum without scruple and without
     enquiry; for it is your own. Mine it never was, and none else has
     any claim upon it. It came into my possession within this hour,
     from whence you may never know; but I will conceal it till all is
     over, lest you squander upon the dying that which the living will
     need.

                                             'E. MORTIMER.'

I instantly conjectured that this sum was the gift of Mr Maitland. 'And
yet,' said I to myself, 'he has no interest in me now, except such as he
would take in any one whom he thought unfortunate. Perhaps--if I could
see his letters to Miss Mortimer--but I am sure his sentiments are of no
consequence to me,--only, if this money be really his, I ought
undoubtedly to restore it; and this from no impulse of pride certainly.
Is there not a wide difference between humility and meanness?'
Persuading myself, that it was quite necessary to ascertain the true
owner of the money, I obtained permission to examine the correspondence
which my friend had left behind. I found it to contain many letters from
Mr Maitland, but only one in which I was mentioned, otherwise than in
the words of common courtesy; and of that one, the tantalising caution
of my friend had spared only the following fragment:--

'I will not be dazzled by your pictures of your young friend's
improvement. I consider, that while you are drawing them, she is before
you; turning up her transparent cheek as she used to do, and looking up
in your face half sideways through her long black eyelashes, with that
air of arch ingenuousness that must tempt you to give her credit for
every virtue. I will not allow your partiality to blind me nor yourself
to the probability, that all her apparent progress is not real. Ellen
has warm passions and a vivid imagination; therefore, it is impossible
that she should fail to receive a strong impression from events which
have changed the whole colour of her fate. But the passions and the
imagination are not the seat of religion. Besides, admitting that she
has received a new principle of action, we must recollect, that pride
and self-indulgence are not to be cured in an hour; nor can the opposite
virtues spring without culture. The principle which guides our habits
may be suddenly changed; and perhaps no means is more frequently
employed for this change than severe calamity: but our habits themselves
are of slow growth; slowly the seeds of evil are eradicated; laboriously
the good ground is prepared; watered with the dews of heaven, the good
seed, in progress that baffles human observation, advances from the
feeble germ that scarcely rears itself from the dust, to the mature
plant which bringeth forth an hundred fold. So you see, my good friend,
I am determined to be wise; to read your encomiums with allowance; and,
having painfully escaped from danger, to be cautious how I tempt it
again.

'The execution of my present plans must detain me in exile for years to
come; otherwise I could dream of a time when, having vanquished the
power of that strange girl over my happiness, I might venture to watch
over hers, perhaps be permitted to aid her improvement. I think I had
some slight influence over her. If it were fit that a social being
should waste feeling and affection in dreams, I could dream delightfully
of----'

'Of what?' thought I, when I reached this provoking interruption,--and I
too began to dream. 'Does he still love me?' I asked myself. 'Can the
grave, wise Mr Maitland still remember the rosy cheek and the long black
eyelashes? Can he do no more than fly from his bane, but long after it
still?' In spite of the regulations under which I had laid my heart,--in
spite of the sorrow which weighed heavily upon it, the spirit of Ellen
Percy fluttered in it for a moment. 'But why should I smile at his
weakness, though I am myself exempt from that strange whim called love.
Yes, certainly, for ever exempt. I have not withstood Maitland to be won
by the monkey tricks and mawkish commonplace of ordinary men. "Power
over his happiness!" But for this strange coldness of heart, and my own
unpardonable folly, I might have made him happy. But that is all over
now. Now I can only wish and pray for his happiness. And if it be
necessary to his peace that he forget me, I will pray that he may. No
one heart on earth will then, indeed, beat warm to me; but the earth and
all that it contains will soon pass away.'--And I shed some tears either
over the transitory nature of all things here below, or over some
reflection not quite so well defined.

Having perused the mutilated letter more than once, and finding my
curiosity rather stimulated than gratified by the perusal, I certainly
did not relax in the diligence with which I examined my friend's
repositories. But I could not discover one line from Mr Maitland of a
later date than six months before the death of Miss Mortimer; and I
recollected, that though she regularly received his letters, and
affected no mystery in regard to them, she never desired me to read
them, but often in my presence destroyed them with her own hand. For the
preservation of the fragment I seemed indebted to accident alone; and I
more than half suspected, that Mr Maitland's later correspondence had
purposely been concealed from the one who formed its principal subject.
I wondered at my friend's caution. 'Could she know me so little,'
thought I, 'as to fear that I should be infected by this folly of
Maitland's?--That I should be won by this involuntary second-hand sort
of courtship?--That I should be mean enough to like a man who in a
manner rejected me?' But whatever was the motive of Miss Mortimer's
caution, she had left no indication of Mr Maitland's present sentiments
towards me; nor any clue by which I could trace to him the source of my
unexpected wealth.

Still I scarcely doubted, that I owed my three hundred pounds to the
generosity of Maitland, and I often thought of restoring the money to
him; since, considering the terms upon which we had parted, few things
could be more humiliating for me than to become a pensioner on his
bounty. But I was restrained from writing to him, by the fear that, as
possibly he had never intended to offer me such a gift, he might
consider my addressing him upon the subject as a mere device, to obtain
the renewal of an intercourse which he had voluntarily renounced.

Besides, Miss Mortimer's bequest furnished my only means of discharging
another debt which had long occasioned me more mortification than I
could have suffered from any obligation to Mr Maitland. My degrading
debt to Lord Frederick was still unpaid; and my deliverance from
absolute and immediate want was less gratifying to me, than the power of
escaping from obligation to a wretch who had given proof of such
heartless selfishness. I, therefore, resolved to comply with my friend's
injunction to use without further enquiry the money which had so
providentially been placed within my reach; and the first purpose to
which it was devoted, was the repayment of Lord Frederick's loan, with
every shilling of interest to which law could have entitled him. The
remainder I could not help dividing with Miss Mortimer's old servant; as
the poor creature, who had grown grey in the family of my friend, had
been deprived of the bequest by which her mistress had intended to
acknowledge her services. The purchase of a few decencies which my own
wardrobe required, and the expense of a plain grave-stone to mark the
resting-place of the best of women, reduced my possessions to thirty
pounds. With this provision, which, small as it was, I owed to most
singular good fortune, I was obliged to quit the asylum which had
sheltered me from my bitterest sorrow, and had witnessed my most
substantial joys; the home which was endeared to me by the kindness of a
lost friend,--the birth-place of my better being,--the spot which was
hallowed by my first worship.

It was on a stormy winter night, I remember it well, that I turned
weeping from the door of my only home. All day I had wandered through
the cottage; I had sat by my friend's death-bed, and laid my head upon
her pillow. I had placed her chair as she was wont to place it; had
realised her presence in every well known spot, and bidden her a
thousand and a thousand times farewell. When I left the house, the
closing door sounded as drearily as the earth which I had heard rattle
on her coffin. It seemed the signal, that I was shut out from all
familiar sights and sounds for ever. The storm that was beating on me
became, by a natural thought, the type of my after life; and when all
there seemed darkness, my mind wandered back to the sorrows of the
past. I recalled another time when the wide earth, which lodges and
supports her children of every various tribe, and opens at least in her
bosom a resting place for them all, contained no home for me. I
remembered a time when I had felt myself alone, though in the presence
of the universal Father,--destitute, in a world stored with his
bounty,--desolate, though Omnipotence was pledged to answer my cry. My
deliverance from this orphan state,--from this disastrous darkness,
rushed upon my mind. I thought upon the mighty transformation which had
gladdened the desert for me, and made the solitary place rejoice. The
cry of thanksgiving burst from my lips, although it died amidst the
storm. 'Oh Thou!' I exclaimed, 'who from pollution didst reclaim,--from
rebellion didst receive,--from despair didst revive me,--let but Thy
presence be with me; and let my path lead where it will!'

As I passed the village churchyard, I turned to visit the grave of her
whom I had lost. The stone had been placed upon it since I had seen it
last; and I felt as if the performance of the last duty had made our
separation more complete. 'And is this all that I can do for thee, my
friend?' said I. 'Are all the kindly charities cut off between us for
ever? Hast thou, who wert so lately alive to the joys and the sorrows of
every living thing, no share in all that is done or suffered here? Hast
thou, who so lately wert my other soul, no feeling now that owns kindred
with any thought of mine?--Yes. On one theme, in one employment we can
sympathise still. We can still worship together.' Kneeling upon the
grave of my last earthly friend, I commended myself to a heavenly one,
and was comforted.




CHAPTER XIX

    _They hate to mingle in the filthy fray,
    Where the soul sours, and gradual rancour grows
    Imbittered more from peevish day to day._

                                             Thomson.


Though I was no longer of a temper to reject the means of comfort which
still remained within my reach, or scornfully to repulse the mercies
both of God and man, I had accepted with reluctance the asylum offered
by the clergyman to whom Miss Mortimer had recommended me; for the
reserve which shrinks from obligation is one of the most unconquerable
forms of pride. Besides, though the Doctor's professional duties had
made me somewhat acquainted with him, his family were, even by
character, strangers to me. The state of Miss Mortimer's health had long
precluded us from paying or receiving visits; and my friend had none of
those habits of moral portrait-painting which seduce so many into
caricature. My reluctance to accept of the good man's hospitality had,
however, yielded partly to necessity, partly to the recollection that I
had once heard the 'Doctor's lady' called 'the cleverest woman in the
country.' For ability I had always entertained a high regard; which is
one of vanity's least bare-faced ways of claiming kindred with it. A
residence with persons of education and good manners was irresistible,
when the only alternative was an abode in a mean lodging, in which pride
or prudence would forbid me to receive even the few who still owned my
acquaintance. I had therefore consented to remain with Dr ---- till an
answer should arrive from the sister to whom he had written on my
behalf.

Though I knew that I was expected at the parsonage on the evening when
I left Miss Mortimer's, I lingered long by the way. The spirit which,
for a moment, had raised me above my fate, could not tarry; and earthly
woes and earthly passions soon resumed their power. A feeling of
loneliness and neglect returned to weigh upon my heart; and when I
reached the gate within which I was about to seek a shelter, I stopped;
leant my head against it; and wept, as if I had never committed myself
to a Father's protection,--never exulted in a Father's care. I felt it
unkind that no one came to save me the embarrassment of introducing
myself; and perhaps even my pride would not have stooped to the effort,
had I not at last been accosted by my host; who excused himself for not
having come to escort me, by saying that he had been unavoidably engaged
in professional duty. He now welcomed me cordially; expressing a hope
that I should soon feel myself at home,--'that is,' continued he, 'as
soon as the exertions of my good woman will allow you.'

To this odd proviso I could only answer, 'That I was afraid my visit
might put Mrs ---- to inconvenience.'

'I wish that were possible, Miss Percy,' returned he; 'for then she
would be quite in her element.'

By this time we had reached the door, and Dr ---- knocked loudly. No
answer came, though the sounds of busy feet were heard within, and
lights glanced swiftly across the windows. After another vigorous
assault upon the knocker, the door was opened by a panting maid-servant;
in time to exhibit the descent of my hostess from a stool which she had
mounted, as it appeared, to light a lamp that hung from the ceiling.
Snatching off a checked apron, which she threw into a corner, she
advanced to receive me. 'Miss Percy!' she cried, 'I am so glad to see
you!--Doctor, I had no notion you could have got back so soon;--and
indeed ma'am I am quite proud that you will accept of such
accommodations as--Lord bless me, girl! did ever any body see such a
candlestick?--This way ma'am, if you please,--To bring up a thing like
that before strangers!'

During this miscellaneous oration, I had made my way into the parlour,
and taken possession of the first seat I could find. But this was too
natural an arrangement of things to satisfy my good hostess. 'Oh dear!
Miss Percy,' said she, 'you are quite in the way of the door,--pray take
this side; Doctor, can't you give Miss Percy that chair?'

At last the turmoil of placing us was over; and the good lady was
compelled to be quiet for a little. The scenes which I had lately
witnessed, the sense of being a stranger in what was now my only home,
depressed my spirits; yet good manners inclined me to enter into
conversation with my hostess. I soon found, however, that this was, for
the present, out of the question; for though, under a sense of duty, she
frequently spoke to her guest, my replies evidently escaped her powers
of attention, these being occupied by certain sounds proceeding from the
kitchen. For a while she kept fidgeting upon her chair, looking
wistfully towards the door; her politeness maintaining doubtful strife
with her anxieties. At last a crash of crockery overcame her
self-denial, and she ran out of the room.

Our ears were presently invaded by all the discords of wrath and hurry;
but the Doctor, who seemed accustomed to such tumults, quietly drew his
chair close to mine, and began to discuss the merits of a late
publication, repeating his remarks with immovable patience, as often as
they were lost in the din. At length, however, he was touched in a
tender point; for now an audible kick produced a howl from the old
house-dog. The Doctor started up, took three strides across the room,
wiped his forehead, and sat down again. 'I thank Heaven,' said he, 'that
the children are all in bed,'--and he went on with his criticism.

Late came the supper; and with it mine hostess, looking 'unutterable
things.' She forced her mouth, however, into an incongruous smile, while
she apologised to me for her absence; but she was too full of her recent
disaster long to deny herself the comforts of complaint and condolence.
'I hope, Miss Percy, you will try to eat a little bit of supper; though
to be sure it is a pretty supper indeed for one who has been accustomed
as you have been!'

The looks of the speaker showed me that this speech was less intended
for me than for the poor girl who waited at table. 'I assure you, madam,
the supper is much better than any I ever was accustomed to. I never
exceed a biscuit or a jelly.'

'Oh you are very good to say so; but I am sure,--and then to have it
served upon such mean-looking, nasty old cracked rubbish,--but I hope
you'll excuse it, ma'am; for Kitty there has thought fit to break no
less than three dozen of our blue china supper-set at one crash.'

'That is a great pity.'

'Pity! I declare my patience is quite worn out.'

'We have reason to be thankful,' said the Doctor, 'that she did the
thing at once; it puts you into only one fury, instead of three dozen.
The treatise we were talking of, Miss Percy----'

'Mercy upon me!' interrupted the lady, 'there is no salt in this
stuffing!'

'I say the author appears to me to reason upon false premises when----'

'Hand the sauce to Miss Percy, do, that she may have something to
flavour that tasteless mess.'

The poor fluttered girl, in her haste to obey, dropped the sauce-boat
into my lap. 'Heaven preserve me!' exclaimed the lady; 'she has finished
your new sarcenet gown, I declare.--Well! if you an't enough to drive
one distracted!'

In vain did I protest that the gown was very little injured;--in vain
did I represent that the poor girl was unavoidably fluttered by her
former misdemeanour; peace was not re-established till the close of
supper allowed the delinquent to retire. Mrs ---- then seemed to collect
her thoughts, and to recollect the propriety of conversing with her
guest. 'It must have been very hard upon poor Miss Mortimer,' said she,
'to be so long confined, and all the affairs of her family at sixes and
sevens all the while. To be sure, I dare say you would spare no trouble;
but, after all, there is nothing like the eye of a mistress.'

Shocked as I was at this careless mention of my friend, I forced myself
to answer; 'Miss Mortimer's method was so regular that I never could
perceive where any trouble was necessary.'

'That might be the case in Miss Mortimer's family. For my part I have
hard enough work with mine from morning to night. I really can't
conceive how people get on, who take matters so easily. To be sure there
must be great waste; but some people can afford that better than
others.'

'There was no waste in Miss Mortimer's family, madam,' answered I, my
spirit rising at this reflection on my friend, 'not even a waste of
power.'

I repented of this taunt almost the moment it was uttered. But it was
lost upon my hostess; who went on to demonstrate, that, without her
ceaseless intervention, disorder and ruin must ensue. 'Miss Percy', said
the Doctor gravely, 'are you satisfied with the order of pins in
ordinary paper; or do you purchase the pins wholesale, that you may
arrange them more correctly for yourself?'

'Oh, none of your gibes, Dr ----; you know very well I don't spend my
time in sticking pins, or any such trifles. I have work enough, and more
than enough, in attending to your family.'

'Ay, my dear,--and fortunate it is that all your industry has taken that
turn, for you can never be industrious by proxy; you can work with no
hands but your own.'

It was now the hour of rest; or, more properly speaking, it was bedtime;
for I was disturbed by the bustle of the household long after I had
retired to a chamber, finical enough to keep me in mind that it was the
'stranger's room.' With a sigh, I remembered the quiet shelter I had
lost, and that true hospitality which never once reminded me, even by
officious cares, that I was a stranger. I hoped, however, that the
turmoil occasioned by my arrival, and the destruction of the blue
supper-set being over, peace might be restored in the family; and the
calm of the following morning be the sweeter for the hurricane of the
night. But the tumult of the evening was a lulling murmur to the full
chorus of busy morn. Ringing, trampling, scraping, knocking, scrubbing,
and all the clatter of housewifery, were mingled with the squalls of
children, and the clang of chastisement; and above all swelled my
landlady's tones, in every variety of exhortation and impatience.

In short, Mrs ---- was one of those who could not be satisfied with
putting the machine in motion, unless she watched and impelled the
action of every wheel and pivot. The interference was of course more
productive of derangement than of despatch. Besides, by taking upon
herself all the business of the maids, my hostess necessarily neglected
that of the mistress; the consequence of which was general confusion and
discomfort. Few can be so ignorant of human nature as to wonder that I
endured the petty miseries to which I was thus subjected with less
patience than I had lately shown under real misfortune. A little
religion will suffice to produce acts of resignation, when events have
tinctured the mind with their own solemnity, or when, 'by the sadness of
the countenance the heart is,' for a time, 'made better;' but Christian
patience finds exercise on a thousand occasions, when the dignity of her
name would be misapplied; and I had yet much to gain of that heavenly
temper, which extends its influence to lesser actions and lesser
foibles. A few hours served to make me completely weary of my new abode;
and I anxiously wished for the summons which was to transfer me to
another. Dr ---- assured me that his sister would lose no time in
endeavouring to serve me; and I was determined to accept of any
situation which she should propose.

Mrs Murray, the lady to whose patronage I had been recommended, was the
wife of a naval officer. Captain Murray was then at sea; and she, with
her son and daughter, resided in Edinburgh. Far from being averse to
follow my fortunes in this distant quarter, I preferred a residence
where I was wholly unknown. The friendship of Mr Sidney procured for me
the offer of an eligible situation in town; but I was predetermined
against hazarding the humiliations to which such a situation must have
exposed me. The wisdom of this resolution, I must own, would not bear
examination, and therefore I was never examined; for I retained too much
adroitness in self-deceit to let prudence fairly contest the point with
pride. I was destined to pay the penalty of my choice, and to illustrate
the invariable sequence of a 'haughty spirit' and a 'fall.'

The expected letter at length arrived; and I thought myself fortunate
beyond my hopes, when I found that Mrs Murray was inclined to receive me
into her own family. My knowledge of music, particularly my skill in
playing on the harp, had recommended me as a teacher in a country which
pays for her fruitfulness in poetry by a singular sterility in the other
fine arts. Mrs Murray enquired upon what terms I would undertake the
tuition of her daughter; and seemed only fearful that my demands might
exceed her powers. After the receipt of her letter I was most eager to
depart. To terms I was utterly indifferent. All I wanted was quiet, and
an asylum which inferred no obligation to strangers. It is true, that my
hostess often assured me of the pleasure she received from my visit; but
my presence evidently occasioned such an infinity of trouble, that, if
her assurances were sincere, she must have been filled with more than
the spirit of martyrdom in my service. I was too impatient to be gone to
wait the formal arrangement of my engagement with Mrs Murray. I
instantly wrote to commit the terms of it entirely to herself; and then
took measures to obtain my immediate conveyance to Scotland.

A journey by land was too expensive to be thought of; I therefore
secured my passage in a merchant vessel. It was in vain that Dr ----
advised me to wait further instructions from his sister; in hopes
that she might suggest a more eligible mode of travelling, or at least
give me notice that she was prepared for my reception. My dislike of my
present abode, my restlessness under a sense of obligation to such a
person as Mrs ----, prevailed against his counsels. In vain did he
represent the discomforts of a voyage at such a season of the year. I
was not more habitually impatient of present evil than fearless of that
which was yet to come. In short, after a little more than a week's
residence at the parsonage, I insisted upon making my début as a sailor
in the auspicious month of February, and committing myself, at that
stormy season, to an element which as yet I knew only from description.

Dr ---- and Mr Sidney accompanied me to the vessel; and I own I began to
repent of my obstinacy, when they bade me farewell. As I saw their boat
glide from the vessel's side, and answered their parting signals, and
saw first the known features, then the forms, then the little bark
itself, fade from my sight, I wept over the rashness which had exiled me
among strangers; and coveted the humblest station cheered by the face of
friend or kinsman. The wind blowing strong and cold soon obliged me to
leave the deck; and, when I entered the close airless den in which I was
to be imprisoned with fourteen fellow-sufferers, I cordially wished
myself once more under the restraint imposed by nice arrangement and
finical decoration.

I was soon obliged to retreat to a bed, compared with which the worst I
had ever occupied was the very couch of luxury. 'It must be owned,'
thought I, 'that a sea voyage affords good lessons for a fine lady.'
Sleep was out of the question. I was stunned with such variety of noise
as made me heartily regret the quiet of the parsonage. The rattling of
the cordage, the lashing of the waves, the heavy measured tread, the
tuneless song repeated without end, interrupted only by the sudden
dissonant call, and then begun again,--these, besides a hundred
inexplicable disturbances, continued day and night. To these was soon
added another, which attacked my quiet through other mediums than my
senses, the ship sprung a leak, and the pumps were worked without
intermission.

Meanwhile the wind rose to what I thought a hurricane; and, among us
passengers, whose ignorance probably magnified the danger, all was alarm
and dismay. A general fit of piety bespoke the general dread; and they
who had before been chiefly intent upon establishing their importance
with their fellow-travellers, seemed now feelingly convinced of their
own dependence and insignificancy. For my part, I prepared for death
with much greater resignation than I had found to bestow upon the
previous evils of my voyage;--not surely that it is easier to resign
life than to submit to a few inconveniences,--but that I had a tendency
to treat my religion like one of the fabled divinities, who are not to
be called into action except upon worthy occasions; whereas, it is
indeed her agency in matters of ordinary occurrence that shows her true
power and value. I am much mistaken, if it be not easier to die like a
martyr than to live like a Christian; and if the glory of our faith be
not better displayed in a life of meekness, humility, and self-denial,
than even in a death of triumph. I am sure the question would not bear
dispute, if all mankind were unhappily born with feelings as lively, and
passions as strong as mine. Whether my faith would have been equal even
to what I account the lesser victory, remains to be proved; for, on the
second day, the gale abated, and, from our heart-sinking prison we were
once more released, to breathe the fresh breeze which now blew from the
near coast of Holland.

The bloody conflict was then only beginning which has won for my country
such imperishable honours. At Rotterdam we could then find safety, and
the means of refitting our crazy vessel, so far as was necessary for the
completion of our voyage. It will readily be believed, that those of our
company who were least accustomed to brave the ocean were eager to tread
the steady earth once more. We all went on shore; and I, wholly ignorant
of all methods of economy in a situation so new to me, took up my abode
in a comfortable hotel; where I remained during the week which elapsed
before we were able to proceed upon our voyage. At the end of that time,
I discovered, with surprise and consternation, that my wealth had
diminished to little more than ten guineas. I comforted myself, however,
by recollecting, that once under the protection of Mrs Murray I should
have little occasion for money; and that a few shillings were all the
expense which I was likely to incur before I was safely lodged in my new
home.

The remainder of the voyage was prosperous; and in little more than a
fortnight after my first embarkation, I found myself seated in the
hackney-coach which was to convey me from the harbour to Edinburgh. Not
even the beauty and singularity of this romantic town could divert my
imagination from the person upon whom I expected so much of my future
happiness to depend. I anticipated the character, the manners, the
appearance, the very attire of Mrs Murray; imagined the circumstances of
my introduction, and planned the general form of our future intercourse.
'Oh that she may be one whom I can love, and love safely,' thought I;
'one endowed with somewhat of the spirit of her whom I have lost!' My
intercourse with the world, perhaps my examination of my own heart, had
destroyed much of my fearless confidence in every thing that bore the
human form; and now my spirits sunk, as I recollected how small was my
chance of finding another Miss Mortimer.

A sudden twilight was closing as I entered the street of dull
magnificence, in which stood the dwelling of my patroness. Though in the
midst of a large city, all seemed still and forsaken. The bustle of
business or amusement was silent here. Single carriages, passing now and
then at long intervals, sounded through the vacant street till the noise
died in the distance. The busy multitudes whom I was accustomed to
associate with the idea of a city had retired to their homes; and I
envied them who could so retire,--who could enter the sanctuary of their
own roof, sit in their own accustomed seat, hear the familiar voice, and
grasp the hand that had ten thousand times returned the pressure.

All around me strengthened the feelings of loneliness which are so apt
to visit the heart of a stranger; and I anxiously looked from the
carriage to descry the only spot in which I would claim an interest. The
coach stopped at the door of a large house, handsome indeed, but more
dark, I thought, and dismal if possible than the rest. I scarcely
breathed till my summons was answered; nor was it without an effort that
I enquired whether Mrs Murray was at home?

'No, madam,' was the answer; 'she has been gone this fortnight.'

'Gone! Good heavens! Whither?'

'To Portsmouth, madam. As soon as the news came of the Captain's coming
in wounded, Mrs Murray and Miss Arabella set out immediately.'

'And did she leave no letter for me? No instructions?'

The servant's answer convinced me that my arrival was even wholly
unexpected. Struck with severe disappointment, overwhelmed with a sense
of utter desertedness, my spirits failed; and I sunk back into the
carriage faint and forlorn.

'Do you alight here ma'am?' enquired the coachman.

'No!' answered I, scarcely knowing what I said.

'Where do you go next?' asked the man.

I replied only by a bitter passion of tears. 'Alas!' thought I, 'I once,
in the mere wilfulness of despair, rejected the blessings of a home and
a friend. How righteous is the retribution which leaves me now homeless
and friendless!'

'Perhaps, ma'am,' said the servant, seemingly touched by my distress,
'Mrs Murray may have left some message with Mr Henry for you.'

'Mr Henry!' cried I; 'is Mrs Murray's son here?'

'Yes, ma'am. Mr Henry staid to finish his classes in the college. He is
not at home just now; but I expect him every minute. Will you please to
come in and rest a little?'

With this invitation I thought it best to comply; and dismissing the
coach, followed the servant into the house. I was shown into a handsome
parlour, where the cheerful blaze of a Scotch coal fire gave light
enough to show that all was elegance and comfort. My buoyant heart rose
again; and, not considering how improbable it was that my patroness
should commit a girl of eighteen to the guardianship of a youth little
above the same age, I began to hope that Mrs Murray had given her son
directions to receive me. In this hope I sat waiting his return; now
listening for his approach; now trying to conjecture what instructions
he would bring me; now beguiling the time with the books which were
scattered round the room.

Though some of these were works of general literature, there was
sufficient peculiarity in the selection, to show that the young student
was intended for the bar. Indeed, before he arrived, I had formed, from
a view of the family apartment, a tolerable guess of the habits and
pursuits of its owners. Open upon a sofa was a pocket Tibullus; within a
Dictionary of Decisions lay a well-read first volume of the Nouvelle
Eloise. Then there were Le Vaillant's Travels; Erskine's Institutes; and
a Vindication of Queen Mary. 'If the young lawyer has not disposed of
his heart already, I shall be too pretty for my place,' thought I: 'and
now for my patroness!' The card-racks contained some twenty visiting
tickets, upon which the same matronly names were repeated at least four
times. A large work-bag, which hung near the great chair, was too well
stuffed to close over a half-knitted stocking, and a prayer-book, which
opened of itself at the prayer for those who travel by sea. My
imagination instantly pictured a faded, serious countenance, with that
air of tender abstraction which belongs to those whose thoughts are
fixed upon the absent and the dear. Miss Arabella's magnificent harp
stood in a window, and her likeness in the act of dancing a hornpipe
hung over the chimney; her music-stand was loaded with easy sonatas and
Scotch songs; and her portfolio was bursting with a humble progression
of water-colour drawings.

My conjectures were interrupted by a loud larum at the house-door, which
announced the return of my young host. My heart beat anxiously. I
started from the sofa like one who felt no right to be seated there; and
sat down again, because I felt myself awkward when standing. I thought I
heard the servant announce my arrival to his master as he passed through
the lobby; and after a few questions asked and answered in an under
voice, the young man entered the parlour with a countenance which
plainly said, 'What in the world am I to do with the creature?' As I
rose to receive him, however, I saw this expression give place to
another. Strong astonishment was pictured in his face, then yielded
again to the glow of youthful complacency and admiration.

On my part I was little less struck with my student's exterior, than he
appeared to be with mine. Instead of the awkward, mawkish school-boy
whom I had fancied, he was a tall, elegant young man, with large
sentimental black eyes, and a clear brown complexion, whose paleness
repaid in interest whatever it subtracted from the youthfulness of his
appearance.

I was the first to speak. Having expressed my regret at Mrs Murray's
absence, and the cause of it, I begged to know whether she had left any
commands for me. Murray replied, that he believed his mother had written
to me before her departure; and that she had hoped her letter might
reach me in time to delay my journey to a milder season.

'Unfortunately,' said I, 'most unfortunately, I had set out before that
letter arrived.'

'Excuse me,' returned my companion, with polite vivacity, 'if I cannot
call any accident unfortunate which has procured me this pleasure.' I
could answer this civility only by a gesture, for my heart was full. I
saw that I had no claim to my present shelter; and other place of refuge
I had none. Oh how did I repent the self-will which had reduced me to so
cruel a dilemma! 'In a few weeks at farthest,' continued Mr Murray, 'my
father will be able to travel; and then I am certain my mother will
bring Arabella home immediately.'

Still I could make no reply. 'A few weeks!' thought I, 'what is to
become of me even for one week, even for one night!' Tears were
struggling for vent; but to have yielded to my weakness, would have
seemed like an appeal to compassion; and the moment this thought
occurred, the necessary effort was made. I rose, and requested that Mr
Murray would allow his servant to procure a carriage for me, and direct
me to some place where I could find respectable accommodation.

To this proposal Murray warmly objected. 'I hope,--I beg Miss Percy,'
said he eagerly, 'you will not think of leaving my mother's house
to-night. Though she has been obliged to refuse herself the pleasure of
receiving you, I know she would be deeply mortified to find that you
would not remain, even for one night, under her roof.'

I made my acknowledgments for his invitation; but said, I had neither
title nor desire to intrude upon any part of Mrs Murray's family, and
renewed my request. Murray persevered in urgent and respectful
entreaties. They were so well seconded by the lateness of the hour, for
it was now near ten o'clock, and by the contrast of the comfort within
doors, with the storm which was raging abroad, that my scruples began to
give way; and the first symptom of concession was so eagerly seized,
that, before I had leisure to consider of proprieties, my young host had
ordered his mother's bedchamber to be prepared for my reception.

This arrangement made, he turned the conversation to general topics, and
amused me very agreeably till we separated for the night. I know not if
ever I had offered up more hearty thanksgivings for shelter and security
than I did in that evening's prayer; so naturally do we reserve our
chief gratitude for blessings of precarious tenure. But I omitted my
self-examination that night; either because I was worn out and languid,
or because I was half conscious of having done what prudence would not
justify.

I slept soundly, however, and awoke in revived spirits. My host renewed
all his attentions. We conversed, in a manner very interesting to
ourselves, of public places, of the last new novel; and this naturally
led us into the labyrinths of the human heart, and the mysteries of the
tender passion. Then I played on the harp, which threw my young lawyer
into raptures; then I sung, which drew tears into the large black eyes.
In short, the forenoon was pretty far advanced before my student
recollected that he had missed his law-class by two hours.

All this was the effect of mere thoughtlessness; for I was guiltless of
all design upon Murray's affections, or even upon his admiration. I now,
however, suddenly recollected myself, and renewed my enquiries for some
eligible abode; but Murray, with more warmth than ever, objected to my
removal. He laboured to convince me that his mother's house, for so he
dexterously called it, was the most eligible residence for me, at least
till I should learn how Mrs Murray wished me to act. Finding me a little
hard of conviction, he proposed a new expedient. He offered to call upon
a sister of his father's, and to obtain for me her advice or assistance.
Most cordially did I thank him for this proposal, and urged him to
execute it instantly. He lingered, however, and endeavoured to escape
the subject; and when I persisted in pressing it, he fairly owned his
unwillingness to perform his promise. 'If Mrs St Clare should wile you
away from me,' said he with a very Arcadian sigh, 'how will you ever
repay me for such self-devotion?'

'With an old song,' answered I gaily; 'payment enough for such a
sacrifice.' But I registered the sigh notwithstanding. 'Touched
already!' thought I. 'So much for Tibullus and the Nouvelle Eloise!'

At last I drove him away; but he soon returned, and told me he had not
found Mrs St Clare at home. I made him promise to renew his attempt in
the evening, and proposed meanwhile to write to Mrs Murray an account of
my situation. My companion at first made no objection; but afterwards
discovered that it was almost too late to overtake that day's post, and
offered to save time, by mentioning the matter in the postscript of a
letter which he had already written. I consented; but afterwards obliged
him to tell me, rather unwillingly, in what terms he had put his
communication.

'From the way in which you have written,' said I, when he had ended,
'Mrs Murray will never discover that I am residing in her house. Were it
not better to say distinctly that I am here?'

I looked at my young lawyer as I spoke, and saw him blush very deeply.
He hesitated too; and stammered while he answered, 'that it was
unnecessary, since his mother could not suppose me to reside anywhere
else.'

The full impropriety of my situation flashed upon me at once. Murray
evidently felt that there was something in it which he was unwilling to
submit to the judgment of his mother. My delicacy, or rather perhaps my
pride, thus alarmed, my resolution was taken in a moment; but as I could
not well avow the grounds of my determination, I retired in silence to
make what little preparation was necessary for my immediate departure.

If my purpose had wanted confirmation, it would have been confirmed by a
dialogue which I accidentally overheard, between Murray and a youth who
just then called for him. My host seemed pressing his friend to return
to supper. 'Do come,' said he, 'and I will show you an angel--the
loveliest girl----'--'Where? in this house?'--'Yes, my sister's
governess.'--'Left to keep house for you? Eh? a good judicious
arrangement, faith.'--'Hush--I assure you her manners are as correct as
her person is beautiful;--such elegance,--such modest vivacity,--and
then she sings! Oh, Harry, if you did but hear her sing!'--'Well I
believe I must come and take a look of this wonder.'--'The wonder,'
thought I, 'shall not be made a spectacle to idle boys,--nor remain in a
situation of which even they can see the impropriety.' I rang for the
housemaid; and putting half-a-guinea into her hand, requested that she
would direct me to reputable lodgings, and procure a hackney-coach to
convey me thither. Both of these services she performed without delay;
meanwhile, I went to take leave of my young host.

He heard of my intention with manifest discomposure, and exerted all his
eloquence to shake my purpose; entreating me at least to remain with him
till he had seen Mrs St Clare; but I was more disposed to anger than to
acquiescence, when I recollected that all his entreaties were intended
to make me do what he himself felt to need disguise or apology. Finding
me resolute, he next begged to know where he might bring Mrs St Clare to
wait upon me; but suspecting that my apartments might not be such as I
chose to exhibit, I declined this favour. I took, however, the lady's
address, meaning to avail myself of her assistance in procuring
employment.




CHAPTER XX

    _Lend me thy clarion, goddess! Let me try
    To sound the praise of merit ere it dies;
    Such as I oft have chanced to espy,
    Lost in the dreary shades of dull obscurity._

                                             Shenstone.


With a feeling of dignity and independence which had forsaken me in my
more splendid abode, I took possession of an apartment contrived to
serve the double purposes of parlour and bedchamber. 'I have done
right,' thought I, 'whatever be the consequences; and these are in the
hands of One who has given me the strongest pledge that he will
over-rule them for my advantage.' Yet, alas for my folly! I was almost
the next moment visited by the fear, that the advantage might not be
palpable to present observation, and that it might belong more to my
improvement than to my convenience.

I now felt no reluctance to address Mrs Murray; and to enquire whether
it were still her wish to receive me into her family. One circumstance
alone embarrassed me; I plainly perceived, that I had already made such
an impression upon Henry, as his mother was not likely to approve; and
it seemed dishonourable to owe my admission into her family to her
ignorance of that which she would probably deem sufficient reason to
exclude me. I knew the world, indeed, too well, to expect that the
passion of a youth of twenty, for a girl with a fortune of nine pounds
three shillings, was itself likely to be either serious or lasting; but
its consequences might be both, if it relaxed industry, or destroyed
cheerfulness, darkening the sunny morning with untimely shade.

But how could I forewarn my patroness of her danger? Could I tell her,
not only that one day's acquaintance with her son had sufficed me to
make the conquest, but, which was still less _selon les règles_, to
discover that I had made it? I dared not brave the smile which would
have avenged such an absurdity. After some consideration, I took my
resolution. I determined to introduce myself the next day to Mrs St
Clare, who, I imagined, would not long leave her sister-in-law in
ignorance of my personal attractions; for I have often observed, that we
ladies, while we grudge to a beauty the admiration and praise of the
other sex, generally make her amends by the sincerity and profuseness of
our own.

'And if her description alarm Mrs Murray,' thought I; 'if it deter her
from admitting me under the roof with her son, what then is to become of
me?--What will my pretty features do for me then?--What have they ever
done for me, except to fill my ears with flatteries, and my mind with
conceit, and the hearts of others with envy and malice. Maitland,
indeed,--but no--it was not my face that Maitland loved. Rather to the
pride of beauty I owe that wretched spirit of coquetry by which I lost
him. And now this luckless gift may deprive me of respectable protection
and subsistence. Surely I shall at last be cured of my value for a
bauble so mischievous--so full of temptation--so incapable of
ministering either to the glory of God or the good of man!' Ah, how easy
it is to despise baubles while musing by fire-light in a solitary
chamber!

The evening passed in solitude, but not in weariness; for I was not
idle. I spent the time in writing to Mrs Murray, and in giving to my
friend Dr ---- an account of my voyage, and of my disappointment. The
hour soon came which I now habitually devoted to the invitation of
better thoughts, the performance of higher duties; and thanks be to
Heaven, that neither human converse, nor human protection, nor ought
else that the worldly can enjoy or value, is necessary to the comfort of
that hour!

The next day Murray came early, under pretence of enquiring how I was
satisfied with my accommodation; and I was pleased that the mission
which he had undertaken to Mrs St Clare, gave me a pretext for being
glad to see him. I know not what excuse he could make for a visit of
three hours long; but my plea for permitting it was the impossibility of
ordering him away. He left me, however, at last; and, more convinced
than ever that his mother would do well to dispense with my services, I
went to present myself to Mrs St Clare.

Arrived at her house, I was ushered into the presence of a tall,
elderly, hard-favoured gentlewoman; who, seated most perpendicularly on
a great chair, was employed in working open stitches on a French lawn
apron. I cannot say that her exterior was much calculated to dispel the
reserve of a stranger. Her figure might have served to illustrate all
the doctrines of the acute angle. Her countenance was an apt epitome of
the face of her native land;--rough with deep furrow and uncouth
prominence, and grim with one dusky uniformity of hue. As I entered,
this erect personage rose from her seat, and, therefore, almost
necessarily advanced one step to meet me. I offered some apology for my
intrusion. From a certain rustle of her stiff lutestring gown, I guessed
that the lady made some gesture of courtesy, though I cannot pretend
that I saw the fact.

'Mr Murray, I believe, has been so good as to mention me,' said I.

The lady looked towards a chair; and this I was obliged to accept as an
invitation to sit down.

'I have been particularly unfortunate in missing Mrs Murray,' said I.

'Hum!' returned the lady, with a scarcely perceptible nod; and a pause
followed.

'She left Scotland very unexpectedly.'

'Very unexpectedly.'

Another pause.

'I happened unluckily to have begun my journey before I learnt that it
was unnecessary.'

'That was a pity.'

'I hope she is not likely to be long absent?'

'Indeed there is no saying.'

'Perhaps she may not choose that I should wait her return?'

'Really I can't tell.'

Until this hour, I had never known what it was to shrink before the
repulse of frozen reserve; for the cordiality which had once been
obtained for me by the gifts of nature or of fortune had of late been
secured to me by partial affection and Christian benevolence. My temper
began to rebel; but struggles with my temper were now habitual with me.
I drew a long breath, and renewed my animating dialogue. 'May I ask
whether, in case Mrs Murray should not want my services, you think I am
likely to find employment here as a governess?'

'Indeed I don't know. Few people like to take entire strangers into
their families.'

'The same recommendation which introduced me to Mrs Murray, I can still
command.'

'Hum.'

A long silence followed, for I had another conflict with my temper; but
I was fully victorious before I spoke again.

'I am afraid, madam,' said I, 'that you will not think me entitled to
use Mrs Murray's name with you so far as to beg that, upon her account,
if you should hear of any situation in which I can be useful, you will
have the goodness to recollect me.'

'It is not likely, Miss Percy, that I should hear of any thing to suit
you. At any rate, I make it a rule never to interfere in people's
domestic arrangements.'

My patience now quite exhausted, I took my leave with an air, I fear,
not less ungracious than that of my hostess; and pursued my lonely way
homewards, fully inclined to defer the revolting task of soliciting
employment, till I should ascertain that Mrs Murray's plans made it
indispensable.

How often, as I passed along the street, did I start, as my eye caught
some slight resemblance to a known face, and sigh over the futility of
my momentary hope! He who in the wildest nook of earth possesses one
friend 'to whom he may tell that solitude is sweet,' knows not how
cheerless it is to enter a home drearily secure from the intrusion of a
friend. Yet, having now abundance of leisure for reflection, I should
have been inexcusable, if I had made no use of this advantage; and if,
in the single point of conduct which seemed left to my decision, I had
acted with imprudence. There was evident impropriety in Murray's visits.
To encourage his boyish admiration would have been cruel to him,
ungenerous towards Mrs Murray, and incautious with respect to myself. It
was hard, indeed, to resign the only social pleasure within my reach;
but was pleasure to be deliberately purchased at the hazard of causing
disquiet to the parent, and rebellion in the son? and this too by one
engaged to exercise self-denial as the mere instrument of self-command?
I peremptorily renounced the company of my young admirer; and whoever
would know what this effort cost me, must reject earnest entreaty, and
resist sorrowful upbraiding, and listen to a farewell which is the known
prelude to utter solitude.

A dull unvaried week passed away, during which I never went abroad
except to church. My landlady, indeed, insisted, that even women of
condition might with safety and decorum traverse her native city
unattended; and pointed out from my window persons whom she averred to
be of that description; but the assured gait and gaudy attire of these
ladies made me suspect that she was rather unfortunate in her choice of
instances. At last, in a mere weariness of confinement, I one day
consented to accompany her abroad.

We passed the singular bridge which delighted me with the strangely
varied prospect of antique grandeur and modern regularity,--of a city
cleft into a noble vista towards naked rock and cultivated plain,--seas
busy with commerce, and mountains that shelter distant solitudes. I
could scarcely be dragged away from this interesting spot; but my
landlady, to whom it offered nothing new, was, soon after leaving it,
much more attracted by a little scarlet flag, upon which was printed in
large letters, 'A rouping in here.' This she told me announced a sale of
household furniture, which she expressed much curiosity to see; and I
suffered her to conduct me down a lane, or rather passage, so narrow as
to afford us scarcely room to walk abreast, or light enough to guide us
through the filth that encumbered our way. A second notice directed us
to ascend a dark winding staircase; leading, as I afterwards learned, to
the abodes of about thirty families. We had climbed, I think, about as
high as the whispering gallery of St Paul's, when our progress was
arrested by the crowd which the auction had attracted to one of the
several compartments into which each floor seemed divided. I recoiled
from joining a party apparently composed of the lowest orders of
mankind. But my companion averring that in such places she could often
make a good bargain, elbowed her way into the scene of action.

While I hesitated whether to follow her, my attention was caught by the
beauty of a child, who now half hiding his rosy face on the shoulder of
his mother, cast a sidelong glance on the strangers, and now ventured to
take a more direct view; while she, regardless of the objects of his
curiosity, stood leaning her forehead against the wall in an attitude of
quiet dejection. I watched her for a few moments, and saw the tears
trickle from her face. So venerable is unobtrusive sorrow, that I could
with more ease have accosted a duchess than this poor woman, though her
dress denoted her to be one of those upon whom has fallen a double
portion of the primeval curse. Her distress, however, did not seem so
awe-inspiring to her equals; for one of them presently approaching, gave
her a smart slap upon the shoulder, and, in a tone between pity and
reproach, enquired, 'what ailed her?' The poor woman looked up, wiped
the tears from her eyes, and faintly tried to smile. 'There is not much
ails me,' said she; but the words were scarcely articulate.

'Many a one has been rouped out before now,' said the other.

The reflection was ill-timed; for my poor woman covered her face with
her apron, and burst into a violent fit of sobbing. I had now found a
person of whom I could more freely ask questions, which, indeed, all
seemed eager to answer; and I quickly discovered that Cecil Graham, for
so my mourner was called, was the wife of a soldier, whom the first and
firmest sentiment of a Highlander had lured from his native glen to
follow the banner of his chieftain; that when his regiment had been
ordered abroad, she had unwillingly been left behind; that, in the
decent abode which Highland frugality had procured for her, she had, by
her labour, supported herself and two children; but that, on the night
before her rent became due, she had been robbed of the little deposit
which was meant to pay it; and that her landlord, after some months of
vain delay, had availed himself of his right over the property of his
debtor.

'And will he,' cried I, touched with a fellow-feeling, 'will he drive
this poor young woman abroad among strangers! without a home or a
friend! God forgive him.'

'I do not want for friends, and good friends, madam,' said the
Highlander, in the strong accent of her country, but with far less of
its peculiar pronunciation than disguised the language of her
companions; 'all the streams of Benarde canna' wash my blood from the
laird's himsel'.'

'What laird?' enquired I, smiling at the metaphorical language of my new
acquaintance. 'Eredine himsel', lady; his grandfather and my
great-grandmother were sister and brother childer:' meaning, as I
afterwards found, that these ancestors were cousins.

'And will the laird do nothing for his relation?' said I.

'That's what _he_ would, madam, and that indeed would _he_,' returned
Cecil, laying an odd emphasis upon the pronoun, and gesticulating with
great solemnity. 'He's no' the man to take the child out of the cradle
and put out the smoke.'

'Why do you not apply to him then?'

'Indeed lady I'm no' going to trouble the laird. You see he might think
that I judged he was like bound to uphold me and mine, because Jemmy was
away wi' Mr Kenneth, ye see.'

'What then will you do? Will you allow yourself to be stripped of all?'

'If I could make my way home, lady,' returned the Highlander, 'I should
do well enough;--we must not expect to be always full-handed. What I
think the most upon is, that they should sell the bit cloth that mysel'
span to row us in.'

'To roll you in!' repeated I, utterly unable to guess what constituted
the peculiar value of this bit of cloth.

'Ay,' returned Cecil, 'to wind Jemmy and me in, with your leave, when we
are at our rest; and a bonnier bit linen ye could na' see. The like of
yoursel' might have lain in it, lady, or Miss Graham hersel'.'

I could scarcely help smiling at the tears which poor Cecil was now
shedding over the loss of this strange luxury; and looked up to find
some trace of folly in the countenance of one who, robbed of all her
worldly possessions, bestowed her largest regrets upon a fine
winding-sheet. But no trace of folly was there. The cool sagacity,
indicated by the clear broad forehead and the distinct low-set eyebrow,
was enlivened by the sparkle of a quick black eye; and her firm sharply
chiseled face, though disfigured by its national latitude of cheek,
presented a strong contrast to the dull vulgarity of feature which
surrounded her. When my examination was closed, I enquired how far
distant was the home of which she had spoken.

'Did you ever hear of a place they call Glen Eredine?' said Cecil,
answering my question by another. 'It is like a hundred miles and a bit,
west and north from this.'

'And how do you propose to travel so far at such a season?'

'If it be the will of the Best, I must just ask a morsel, with your
leave, upon the way. I'll not have much to carry--only the infant on my
breast, and a pickle snuff I have gathered for my mother. This one is a
stout lad-bairn--God save him; he'll walk on's feet a bit now and
then.'

Though my English feelings revolted from the ease with which my
Highlander condescended to begging, I could not help admiring the
fortitude with which this young creature, for she did not seem above
two-and-twenty, looked forward to a journey over frozen mountains, and
lonely wilds; which she must traverse on foot, encumbered by two
infants, and exposed to the rigour of a stormy season. I stood pondering
the means of preventing these evils; and at last asked her 'whether the
parish would not bestow somewhat towards procuring her a conveyance?'

'What's your will?' said Cecil, as if she did not quite comprehend me;
though at the same time. I saw her redden deeply.

Thinking she had misunderstood me, I varied the terms of my question.

Cecil's eyes flashed fire. 'The poor's box!' said she, breathing short
from the effort to suppress her indignation, 'Good troth, there's nobody
needs _even_ me to the like. The parish, indeed! No, no, we have come to
much; but we have no come to that yet:' she paused, and tears rose to
her eyes. 'My dear dog,' said she, caressing her little boy, 'ye
shall want both house and hauld before your mother cast shame upon ye;
and your father so far away.'

Confounded at the emotion which I had unwittingly occasioned, I
apologised as well as I was able, assuring her that I had not the least
intention to offend; and that in my country, persons of the most
respectable character accounted it no discredit to accept of parish aid.
At last I partly succeeded in pacifying my Highlander. 'To be sure,'
said she, 'every place must have its _oun_ fashion, and it may come easy
enough to the like of _them_; but its no' to be thought that people
that's come of respected gentles will go to _demean_ themselves and all
that belongs them.'

I was acknowledging my mistake, and endeavouring to excuse it upon the
plea of a stranger's ignorance, when one of the crowd advanced to inform
Cecil that her treasured web was then offering for sale; and, so far as
I could understand the barbarous jargon of the speaker, seemed to urge
the rightful owner to buy it back. Cecil's answer was rather more
intelligible. 'Well, well,' said she, 'if it be ordained, mysel' shall
lie in the bare boards; for that pound shall never be broken by me.'

'What pound?' enquired I.

'A note that Jemmy willed to his mother,' answered Cecil; 'and I never
had convenience to send her yet.'

She spoke with perfect simplicity, as if wholly unconscious of the
generous fidelity which her words implied.

I had so long been accustomed to riches that I could not always remember
my poverty. In five minutes I had glided through the crowd, purchased
Cecil's treasure, restored it to its owner, and recollected that,
without doing her any real service, I had spent what I could ill afford
to spare.

The time had been when I could have mistaken this impulse of
constitutional good nature for an act of virtue; but I had learnt to
bestow that title with more discrimination. I was more embarrassed than
delighted by the blessings which Cecil, half in Gaelic, half in English,
uttered with great solemnity. 'Is it enough,' asked conscience, 'to
humour the prejudices of this poor creature, and leave her real wants
unrelieved?'--'But can they,' replied selfishness, 'spare relief to the
wants of others, who are themselves upon the brink of want?'--'She is
like you, alone in the land of strangers,' whispered sympathy.--'She is
the object,' said piety, 'of the same compassion to which you are
indebted for life--life in its highest, noblest sense!'--'Is it right,'
urged worldly-wisdom, 'to part with your only visible means of
subsistence?'--'You have but little to give,' pleaded my better reason;
'seize then the opportunity which converts the mite into a treasure.'
The issue of the debate was, that I purchased for poor Cecil the more
indispensable articles of her furniture; secured for her a shelter till
a milder season might permit her to travel more conveniently; and found
my wealth diminished to a sum which, with economy, might support my
existence for another week.

Much have I heard of the rewards of an approving conscience, but I am
obliged to confess, that my own experience does not warrant my
recommending them as motives of conduct. I have uniformly found my best
actions, like other fruits of an ungenial climate, less to be admired
because they were good, than tolerated because they were no worse. I
suspect, indeed, that the comforts of self-approbation are generally
least felt when they are most needed; and that no one, who in depressing
circumstances enters on a serious examination of his conduct, ever finds
his spirits raised by the review. If this suspicion be just, it will
obviously follow, that the boasted dignity of conscious worth is not
exactly the sentiment which has won so many noble triumphs over
adversity. For my part, as I shrunk into my lonely chamber, and sighed
over my homely restricted meal, I felt more consolation in remembering
the goodness which clothes the unprofitable lily of the field, and feeds
the improvident tenants of the air, than in exulting that I could bestow
'half my goods to feed the poor.'

That recollection, and the natural hilarity of temper which has survived
all the buffetings of fortune, supported my spirits during the lonely
days which passed in waiting Mrs Murray's reply. At length it came; to
inform me, that the state of Captain Murray's health would induce my
patroness to shun in a milder climate the chilling winds of a Scotch
spring; to express her regrets for my unavailing journey, and for her
own inability to further my plans; and, as the best substitute for her
own presence, to refer me once more to the erect Mrs St Clare. This
reference I at first vehemently rejected; for I had not yet digested the
courtesies which I already owed to this lady's urbanity. But, moneyless
and friendless as I was, what alternative remained? I was at last forced
to submit, and that only with the worse grace for my delay.

To Mrs St Clare's then I went; in a humour which will be readily
conceived by any one who remembers the time when sobbing under a sense
of injury he was forced to kiss his hand and beg pardon. The lady's mien
was nothing sweetened since our last interview. While I was taking
uninvited possession of a seat, she leisurely folded up her work, pulled
on her gloves, and crossing her arms, drew up into the most stony
rigidity of aspect. Willing to despatch my business as quickly as
possible, I presented Mrs Murray's letter, begging that she would
consider it as an apology for my intrusion. 'I have heard from Mrs
Murray,' said my gracious hostess, without advancing so much as a finger
towards the letter which I offered. I felt myself redden, but I bit my
lip and made a new attempt.

'Mrs Murray,' said I, 'gives me reason to hope that I may be favoured
with your advice.'

'You are a much better judge of your own concerns, Miss Percy, than I
can be.'

'I am so entirely a stranger here, madam, that I should be indebted to
any advice which might assist me in procuring respectable employment.'

'I really know nobody just now that wants a person in your line, Miss
Percy.' In my line! The phrase was certainly not conciliating. 'Indeed I
rather wonder what could make my friend Mrs Murray direct you to me.'

'A confidence in your willingness to oblige her, I presume, madam,'
answered I; no longer able to brook the cool insolence of my companion.

'I should be glad to oblige her,' returned the impenetrable Mrs St
Clare; without discomposing a muscle except those necessary to
articulation; 'so if I happen to hear of any thing in your way I will
let you know. In the mean time, it may be prudent to go home to your
friends, and remain with them till you find a situation.'

'Had it been possible for me to follow this advice, madam,' cried I, the
scalding tears filling my eyes, 'you had never been troubled with this
visit.'

'Hum. I suppose you have not money to carry you home. Eh?'

I would have retorted the insolent freedom of this question with a burst
of indignant reproof; but my utterance was choked; I had not power to
articulate a syllable.

'Though I am not fond of advancing money to people I know nothing
about,' continued the lady, 'yet upon Mrs Murray's account here are five
pounds, which I suppose will pay your passage to London.'

For more than a year I had maintained a daily struggle with my pride;
and I fancied that I had, in no small degree, prevailed. Alas! occasion
only was wanting to show me the strength of my enemy. To be thus
coarsely offered an alms by a common stranger, roused at once the
sleeping serpent. A sense of my destitute state, dependent upon
compassion, defenceless from insult; a remembrance of my better fortune;
pride, shame, indignation, and a struggle to suppress them all, entirely
overcame me. A darkness passed before my eyes; the blood sprang
violently from my nostrils; I darted from the room without uttering a
word; and, before I was sensible of my actions, found myself in the open
air.

I was presently surrounded by persons of all ranks; for the people of
Scotland have yet to learn that unity of purpose which carries forward
my townsmen without a glance to the right hand or the left; and I know
not if ever the indisposition of a court beauty was enquired after in
such varied tones of sympathy as now reached my ear. In a few minutes
the fresh air had so completely restored me, that the only disagreeable
consequence of my indisposition was the notice which it had attracted. I
took refuge from the awkwardness of my situation in the only shop which
was then within sight; and soon afterwards proceeded unmolested to my
lonely home.

There I had full leisure to reconsider my morning's adventure. The time
had been when the bare suspicion of a wound would have made my
conscience recoil from the probe. The time had been when I would have
shaded my eye from the light which threatened to show the full form and
stature of my bosom foe; for then, a treacherous will took part against
me, and even my short conflicts were enfeebled by relentings towards the
enemy. But now the will, though feeble, was honest; and I could bear to
look my sin in the face, without fear, that lingering love should forbid
its extermination. A review of my feelings and behaviour towards Mrs St
Clare brought me to a full sense of the unsubdued and unchristian temper
which they betrayed. I saw that whilst I had imagined my 'mountain to
stand strong,' it was yet heaving with the wreckful fire. I felt, and
shuddered to feel, that I had yet part in the spirit of the arch-rebel;
and I wept in bitterness of heart, to see that my renunciation of my
former self had spared so much to show that I was still the same.

Yet had this sorrow no connection with the fear of punishment. I had
long since exchanged the horror of the culprit who trembles before his
judge, for the milder anguish which bewails offence against the father
and the friend; and when I considered that my offences would cease but
with my life,--that the polluted mansion must be rased ere the incurable
taint could be removed,--I breathed from the heart the language in which
the patriarch deprecates an earthly immortality; and even at nineteen,
when the youthful spirit was yet unbroken, and the warm blood yet
bounded cheerily, I rejoiced from the soul that I should 'not live
alway.' Nor had my sorrow any resemblance to despair. A sense of my
obstinate tendency to evil did but rouse me to resolutions of exertion;
for I knew that will and strength to continue the conflict were a pledge
of final victory.

Considering that humility, like other habits, was best promoted by its
own acts, I that very hour forced my unwilling spirit to submission, by
despatching the following billet to Mrs St Clare:--

     'Madam,--Strong, and I confess blamable, emotion prevented me this
     morning from acknowledging your bounty, for which I am not
     certainly the less indebted that I decline availing myself of it. I
     feel excused for this refusal, by the knowledge that circumstances,
     with which it is unnecessary to trouble you, preclude the
     possibility of applying your charity to the purpose for which it
     was offered.

                                             'I am, &c.

                                                       'ELLEN PERCY.'

If others should be of opinion, as I now am, that the language of this
billet inclined more to the stately than the conciliating, let them look
back to the time when duty, compassion, and gratitude, could not extort
from me one word of concession to answer the parting kindness of my
mother's friend. And let them learn to judge of the characters of others
with a mercy which I do not ask them to bestow upon mine; let them
remember that, while men's worst actions are necessarily exposed to
their fellow-men, there are few who, like me, unfold their temptations,
or record their repentance.


CHAPTER XXI

    _His years are young, but his experience old.
    His head unmellowed,--but his judgment ripe.
    And, in a word, (for far behind his worth,
    Come all the praises that I now bestow,)
    He is complete in feature and in mind,
    With all good grace to grace a gentleman._

                                             Shakspeare.


I was now in a situation which might have alarmed the fears even of one
born to penury and inured to hardship. Every day diminished a pittance
which I had no means of replacing; and, in an isolation which debarred
me alike from sympathy and protection, I was suffering the penalty of
that perverse temper, which had preferred exile among strangers to an
imaginary degradation among 'my own people.'

As it became absolutely necessary to discover some means of immediate
subsistence, I expended part of my slender finances in advertising my
wishes and qualifications; but not one enquiry did the advertisement
produce. Perhaps the Scottish mothers in those days insisted upon some
acquaintance with the woman to whom they committed the education of
their daughters, beyond what was necessary to ascertain her knowledge of
the various arts of squandering time. I endeavoured to ward off actual
want by such pastime work as had once ministered to my amusement, and
afterwards to my convenience; but I soon found that my labours were as
useless as they were light; for Edinburgh, at that time, contained no
market for the fruits of feminine ingenuity.

In such emergency, it is not to be wondered if my spirits faltered. My
improvident lightness of heart forsook me; and though I often resolved
to face the storm bravely, I resolved it with the tears in my eyes. I
asked myself a hundred times a day, what better dependence I could wish
than on goodness which would never withhold, and power which could never
be exhausted? And yet, a hundred times a day I looked forward as
anxiously as if my dependence had been upon the vapour tossed by the
wind. I felt that, though I had possessed the treasures of the earth,
the blessing of Heaven would have been necessary to me; and I knew that
it would be sufficient, although that earth should vanish from her
place. Yet I often examined my decaying means of support as mournfully
as if I had reversed the sentiment of the Roman; and 'to live,' had been
the only thing necessary.

I was thus engaged one morning, when I heard the voice of Murray
enquiring for me. Longing to meet once more the glance of a friendly
eye, I was more than half tempted to retract my general order for his
exclusion. I had only a moment to weigh the question, yet the prudent
side prevailed; because, if the truth must be told, I chanced just then
to look into my glass; and was ill satisfied with the appearance of my
swoln eyes and colourless cheeks; so well did the motives of my
unpremeditated actions furnish a clue to the original defects of my
mind. However, though I dare not say that my decision was wise, I may at
least call it fortunate; since it probably saved me from one of those
frothy passions which idleness, such as I was condemned to, sometimes
engenders in the heads of those whose hearts are by nature placed in
unassailable security. This ordinary form of the passion was certainly
the only one in which it could then have affected me; for what woman,
educated as I had been, early initiated like me into heartless
dissipation, was ever capable of that deep, generous, self-devoting
sentiment which, in retirement, springs amid mutual charities and mutual
pursuits; links itself with every interest of this life; and twines
itself even with the hopes of immortality? My affections and my
imagination were yet to receive their culture in the native land of
strong attachment, ere I could be capable of such a sentiment.

As I persevered in excluding Murray, the only being with whom I could
now exchange sympathies was my new Highland friend, Cecil Graham. I
often saw her; and when I had a little conquered my disgust at the filth
and disorder of her dwelling, I found my visits there as amusing as many
of more 'pomp and circumstance.' She was to me an entirely new specimen
of human character; an odd mixture of good sense and superstition,--of
minute parsimony and liberal kindness,--of shrewd observation, and a
land of romantic abstraction from sensible objects. Every thing that was
said or done, suggested to her memory an adventure of some 'gallant
Graham,' or, to her fancy, the agency of some unseen being.

I had heard Maitland praise the variety, grace, and vigour of the Gaelic
language. 'If we should ever meet again,' thought I, 'I should like to
surprise him pleasantly;' so, in mere dearth of other employment, I
obliged Cecil to instruct me in her mother-tongue. The undertaking was
no doubt a bold one, for I had no access to Gaelic books; nor if I had,
could Cecil have read one page of them, though she could laboriously
decipher a little English. But I cannot recollect that I was ever
deterred by difficulty. While Cecil was busy at her spinning, I made her
translate every name and phrase which occurred to me; tried to imitate
the uncouth sounds she uttered; and then wrote them down with vast
expense of consonants and labour. My progress would, however, have been
impossible, if Cecil's dialect had been as perplexing to me as that of
the Lowlanders of her own rank. But though her language was not exactly
English, it certainly was not Scotch. It was foreign rather than
provincial. It was often odd, but seldom unintelligible. 'I learnt by
book,' said she once when I complimented her on this subject; 'and I had
a good deal of English; though I have lost some of it now, speaking
among this uncultivate' people.'

Cecil, who had no idea that labour could be its own reward, was very
desirous to unriddle my perseverance in the study of Gaelic. But she
never questioned me directly; for, with all her honesty, Cecil liked to
exert her ingenuity in discovering by-ways to her purpose. 'You'll be
thinking of going to the North Country?' said she one day, in the tone
of interrogation. I told her I had no such expectation. 'You'll may be
get a good husband to take you there yet; and that's what I am sure I
wish,' said Cecil; as if she thought she had invocated for me the sum of
all earthly good.

'Thank you, Cecil; I am afraid I have no great chance.'

'You don't know,' answered Cecil, in a voice of encouragement. 'Lady
Eredine hersel' was but a Southron, with your leave.'

I laughed; for I had observed that Cecil always used this latter form of
apology when she had occasion to mention any thing mean or offensive.
'How came the laird,' said I, 'to marry one who was but a Southron?'

'Indeed, she was just his fortune, lady,' said Cecil, 'and he could not
go past her. And Mr Kenneth himsel' too is ordained, if he live, save
him, to one from your country.'

'Have you the second-sight, Cecil, that you know so well what is
ordained for Mr Kenneth?'

'No, no, lady,' said Cecil, shaking her head with great solemnity, 'if
you'll believe me, I never saw any thing _by_ common. But we have a word
that goes in our country, that "a doe will come from the strangers' land
to couch in the best den in Glen Eredine." And the wisest man in
Killifoildich, and that's Donald MacIan, told me, that "the loveliest of
the Saxon flowers would root and spread next the hall hearth of Castle
Eredine."'

'A very flattering prophecy indeed, Cecil; and if you can only make it
clear that it belongs to me, I must set out for Glen Eredine, and push
my fortune.'

'That's not to laugh at, lady,' said Cecil very gravely; 'there's nobody
can tell where a blessing may light. You might even get our dear Mr
Henry himsel', if he knew but what a good lady you are.'

Now this 'Mr Henry himsel' was Cecil's hero. She thought Mr Kenneth,
indeed, entitled to precedence as the elder brother and heir-apparent;
but her affections plainly inclined towards Henry. He was her constant
theme. Wherever her tales began, they always ended in the praises of
Henry Graham. She told me a hundred anecdotes to illustrate his contempt
of danger, his scorn of effeminacy, his condescension and liberality;
and twice as many which illustrated nothing but her enthusiasm upon the
subject. Her enthusiasm had, indeed, warmth and nature enough to be
contagious. Henry Graham soon ceased to be a mere stranger to me. I
listened to her tales till I knew how to picture his air and
gestures,--till I learned to anticipate his conduct like that of an old
acquaintance; and till Cecil herself was not more prepared than I, to
expect from him every thing noble, resolute, and kind.

To her inexpressible sorrow, however, this idol of her fancy was only an
occasional visiter in Glen Eredine; for which misfortune she accounted
as follows:--

'It will be twenty years at Michaelmas, since some of that Clan
Alpine, who, by your leave, were never what they should be, came and
lifted the cattle of Glen Eredine; and no less would serve them but they
took Lady Eredine's _oun_ cow, that was called Lady Eredine after the
lady's _oun_ sel'. Well! you may judge, lady, if Eredine was the man to
let them keep _that_ with peace and pleasure. Good troth, the laird
swore that he would have them all back, hoof and horn, if there was a
stout heart in Glen Eredine. Mr Kenneth was in the town then at his
learning; more was the pity--but it was not his fault that he was not
there to fight for's _oun_. So the laird would ha' won the beasts home
himsel', and that would _he_. But Mr Henry was just set upon going; and
he begged so long and so sore, that the laird just let him take's will.
Donald MacIan minds it all; for he was standing next the laird's own
chair when he laid's hand upon Mr Henry's head, and says he, "Boy," says
he, "I am sure you'll never shame Glen Eredine and come back
empty-handed." And then his honour gave a bit nod with's head to Donald,
as much as bid him be near Mr Henry; and Donald told me his heart grew
great, and it was no gi'en him to say one word; but thinks he, "I shall
be _cutted_ in inches before he miss me away from him."

'So ye see, there were none went but Donald and three more; for Mr Henry
said that he would make no more dispeace than enough; so much
forethought had he, although he was but, I may say, a child; and Donald
told me that he followed these cattle by the lay of the heather, just as
if he had been thirty years of age; for the eagle has not an eye like
his; ay, and he travelled the whole day without so much as stopping to
break bread, although you may well think, lady, that, in those days, his
teeth were longer than's beard. And at night he rolled him in's plaid,
and laid him down with the rest, as many other good gentles have done
before, when we had no inns, nor coaches, nor such like niceties.

'Well! in the morning he's astir before the roes; and, with grey light,
the first sight he sees coming down Bonoghrie is the Glen Eredine
cattle, and Lady Eredine the foremost. And there was Neil Roy Vich
Roban, and Callum Dubh, and five or six others little worth, with your
leave; and Donald knew not how many more might be in the shealing. Ill
days were then; for the red soldier were come in long before that, and
they had taken away both dirk and gun; ay, and the very claymore that
Ronald Graham wagged in's hand o'er Colin Campbell's neck, was taken and
a'. So he that was born to as many good swords, and targes, and dirks,
as would have busked all Glen Eredine, had no a weapon to lift but what
grew on's _oun_ hazels! But the Grahams, lady, will grip to their foe
when the death-stound's in their fingers. So Mr Henry he stood foremost,
as was well his due; and he bade Neil Roy to give up these beasts with
peace. Well! what think you, lady? the fellow, with your leave, had the
face to tell the laird's son that he had ta'en, and he would keep. "If
you can," quo' Mr Henry, "with your eight men against five." Then Neil
he swore that the like should never be said of him; and he bade Mr Henry
choose any five of his company to fight the Glen Eredine men. "A
bargain!" says Mr Henry, "so Neil I choose you; and shame befa' the
Graham that takes no the stoutest foe he finds." Och on! lady, if you
did but hear Donald tell of that fight. It would make your very skin
creep cold. Well, Mr Henry he held off himsel' so well that Neil at the
length flew up in a rage, and out with's dirk to stick her in our sweet
lamb's heart; but she was guided to light in's arm. Then Donald he got
sight of the blood, and he to Neil like a hawk on a muir-hen, and
gripped him with both's hands round the throat, and held him there till
the dirk fell out of's fingers; and all the time Callum Dubh was
threshing at Donald as had he been corn, but Donald never heeded. Then
Mr Henry was so good that he ordered to let Neil go, and helped him up
with's _oun_ hand; but he flung the dirk as far as he could look at her.

'Well! by this time two of the Macgregors had their backs to the earth;
so the Glen Eredine men that had settled them, shouted and hurra'd, and
away to the cattle. And one cried Lady Eredine, and the other cried
Dubhbhoidheach; and the poor beasts knew their voices and came to
them. But Mr Henry caused save Janet Donelach's cows first, because she
was a widow, and had four young mouths to fill. Be's will, one way or
other, they took the cattle, as the laird had said, hoof and horn; and
the Aberfoyle men durst not lift a hand to hinder them, because Neil
had bound himsel' under promise, that none but five should meddle.'

'But Cecil,' interrupted I, growing weary of this rude story, 'what has
all this to do with Henry Graham's exile from Glen Eredine?'

'Yes, lady,' answered Cecil, 'it has to do; for it was the very thing
that parted him from's own. For, you see, the Southron sheriffs were set
up before that time; and the laird himsel' could not get's will of any
body, as he had a good right; for they must meddle, with your leave, in
every thing. The thistle's beard must na' flee by, but they must catch
and look into. So when the sheriff heard of the Glen Eredine spraith, he
sent out the red soldiers, and took Neil Roy, and Callum Dubh, and
prisoned them in Stirling Castle; and the word went that they were to be
hanged, with your leave, if witness could be had against them; and
Donald, and the rest of them that fought the Aberfoyle men, were bidden
come and swear again' them. Then the word gaed that the sheriff would
have Mr Henry too; but Lady Eredine being a Southron herself, with your
leave, was always wishing to send Mr Henry to the strangers, so now she
harped upon the laird till he just let her take her will.

'So, rather than spill man's life, Mr Henry left both friend and
foster-brother, and them that could have kissed the ground he trode
upon. Och hone! Either I mind that day, or else I have been well told
of; for it comes like a dream to me, how my mother took me up in her
arms, and followed him down the glen. Young and old were there; and the
piper he went foremost, playing the lament. Not one spake above their
breath. My mother wouldno' make up to bid farewell; but when she had
gone till she was no' able for more, she stood and looked, and sent her
blessing with him; wishing him well back, and soon. But the babies that
were in arms that day ran miles to meet him the next time he saw Glen
Eredine.'

'And what became of the two prisoners?' I enquired at the close of this
long story.

''Deed, lady,' replied Cecil, 'they were just forced to let them out
again; for two of our lads hid themselves not to bear witness; and as
for Donald MacIan and Duncan Bane, they answered so wisely that nobody
could make mischief of what they said. So Neil, that very night he was
let out, he lifted four of the sheriffs cows, just for a warning to him;
and drave them to Glen Eredine, in a compliment to Mr Henry.'

This tale, and twenty others of the same sort, while they strengthened
my interest in Cecil's hero, awakened some curiosity to witness the
singular manners which they described. I was not aware how much the
innovations and oppressions of twenty years had defaced the bold
peculiarities of Highland character; how, stripped of their national
garb, deprived of the weapons which were at once their ornament,
amusement, and defence, this hardy race had bent beneath their fate,
seeking safety in evasion, and power in deceit. Nor did I at all suspect
how much my ignorance of their language disqualified me from observing
their remaining characteristics.

But curiosity is seldom very troublesome to the poor; and the vulgar
fear of want was soon strong enough to divert my interest from all that
Cecil could tell me of the romantic barbarisms of her countrymen; or of
the bright eye, the manly port, the primitive hardihood, and the
considerate benevolence of Henry Graham.

I was soon obliged to apply to her for information of a different kind.
My wretched fund was absolutely exhausted, and still no prospect opened
of employment in any form. Having no longer the means of procuring a
decent shelter, I seemed inevitably doomed to be destitute and homeless.
One resource, indeed, remained to me in the plain but decent wardrobe
which I had brought to Scotland. It is true, this could furnish only a
short-lived abundance, since principle, no less than convenience, had
prescribed to me frugality in my attire: but our ideas accommodate
themselves to our fortunes; and I, who once should have thought myself
beggared if reduced to spend 500_l._ a year, now rejoiced over a
provision for the wants of one week as over treasure inexhaustible.

I found it easier, however, to resolve upon parting with my superfluous
apparel, than to execute my resolution. Ignorant of the means of
transacting this humbling business, I had not the courage to expose my
poverty, by asking instructions. I often argued this point with myself;
and proved, to my own entire conviction, that poverty was no disgrace,
since it had been the lot of patriots, endured by sages, and preferred
by saints. Nevertheless, it is not to be told with what contrivance I
obtained from Cecil the information necessary for my purpose, nor with
what cautious concealment I carried it into effect. Having once,
however, conquered the first difficulties, I went on without hesitation:
it was so much more easy to part with a superfluous trifle than to beg
the assistance, or sue for the patronage, of strangers.

My last resource, however, proved even more transient than I had
expected. I soon found it absolutely necessary to bend my spirit to my
fortunes, and to begin a personal search for employment. On a stern
wintry morning I set out for this purpose, with that feeling of dreary
independence which belongs to those who know that they can claim no
favour from any living soul. I applied at every music shop, and made
known my qualifications at every boarding-school I could discover. At
some I was called, with forward curiosity, to exhibit my talent; and the
disgust of my forced compliance was heightened by the coarse applause I
received. From some I was dismissed, with a permission to call again; at
others I was informed that every department of tuition was already
overstocked with teachers of preeminent skill.

At last I thought myself most fortunate in obtaining the address of a
lady who wanted a governess for six daughters; but having examined me
from head to foot, she dismissed me, with a declaration that she saw I
would not do. Before I could shut the room-door, I heard the word
'beauty' uttered with most acrimonious emphasis. The eldest of the young
ladies squinted piteously, and the second was marked with the small-pox.

All that I gained by a whole day wandering was the opportunity of
economising, by remaining abroad till the dinner hour was past. Heroines
of romance often show a marvellous contempt for the common necessaries
of life; from whence I am obliged to infer that their biographers never
knew the real evils of penury. For my part, I must confess that
remembrance of my better days, and prospects of the dreary future, were
not the only feelings which drew tears down my cheek, as I cowered over
the embers of a fire almost as low as my fortunes, and almost as cold as
my hopes. We generally make the most accurate estimate of ourselves when
we are stripped of all the externals which serve to magnify us in our
own eyes. I had often confessed that all my comforts were
undeserved,--that I escaped every evil only by the mitigation of a
righteous sentence; but I had never so truly felt the justice of this
confession as now, when nothing was left me which could, by any latitude
of language, be called my own. Yet, though depressed, I was not
comfortless; for I knew that my deserts were not the measure of my
blessings; and when I remembered that my severest calamities had led to
substantial benefit,--that even my presumption and self-will had often
been over-ruled to my advantage,--I felt at once a disposition to
distrust my own judgment of present appearances, and an irresistible
conviction that, however bereaved, I should not be forsaken. I fear it
is not peculiar to me to reserve a real trust in Providence for the time
which offers nothing else to trust. However, I mingled tears with
prayers, and doubtful anticipation with acts of confidence, till, my
mind as weary as my frame, I found refuge from all my cares in a sleep
more peaceful than had often visited my pillow when every luxury that
whim could crave waited my awaking.

I was scarcely dressed, next morning, when my landlady bustled into my
apartment with an air of great importance. She seated herself with the
freedom which she thought my situation entitled her to use; and abruptly
enquired, whether I was not seeking employment as a governess? A sense
of the helplessness and desolation which I had brought upon myself had
so well subdued my spirit, that I answered this unceremonious question
only by a meek affirmative. Mrs Milne then, with all the exultation of a
patroness, declared that she would recommend me to an excellent
situation; and proceeded to harangue concerning her 'willingness to
befriend people, because there was no saying how soon she herself might
need a friend.'

I submitted, resignedly enough, to the ostentation of vulgar patronage,
while Mrs Milne unfolded her plan. Her sister, she told me, was
waiting-maid to a lady who wanted a governess for her only child,--a
girl about ten years old. She added, that believing me to have come into
Scotland with a view to employment of that kind, she had mentioned me to
this sister; who, she hinted, had no small influence with her mistress.
Finally, she advised me to lose no time in offering my services;
because, as Mrs Boswell's plan of education was now full four-and-twenty
hours old, nobody who knew her could expect its continuance, unless
circumstances proved peculiarly favourable to its stability.

Though I could not help smiling at my new channel of introduction, I was
in no situation to despise any prospect of employment; and I immediately
proceeded to enquire into the particulars of the offered situation, and
into my chance of obtaining it. I was informed that Mr Boswell, having,
in the course of a long residence in one of the African settlements,
realised a competent fortune, had returned home to spend it among his
relations; that he was a good-natured, easy man, who kept a handsome
establishment, loved quiet, a good dinner, and a large allowance of
claret; that in the first of these luxuries he was rather sparingly
indulged by his lady, who, nevertheless, was a very endurable sort of
person to those who could suit themselves to her way. These, however,
were so few, that but for one or two persons made obsequious by
necessity, the Boswells would have eaten their ragouts and drunk their
claret alone.

All this was not very encouraging; but it was not for me to startle at
trifles; and I only expressed my fears that the recommendation of the
waiting-maid might not be thought quite sufficient to procure for me
such a trust as the education of an only child. 'Oh! for that matter,'
said my landlady, 'if you put yourself in luck's way, you have as good a
chance as another; for Mrs Boswell will never fash to look after only
but them that looks after her.'

Agreeably to this opinion, I had no sooner swallowed my spare breakfast
than I walked to George Square, to present myself to Mrs Boswell. I was
informed at her door that she was in bed; but that if I returned about
one o'clock, I should probably find her stirring. At the hour appointed,
I returned accordingly; and, after some demur and consultation between
the footman and the housemaid, I was shown into a handsome breakfast
parlour, where, upon a fashionable couch, half sat, half lay, Mrs
Boswell.

Her thin sharp face, high nose, and dark eyes, gave her at the first
glance, an air of intelligence; but when I looked again, her curveless
mouth, her wandering eyebrows, and low contracted forehead, obliged me
to form a different judgment. The last impression was probably
heightened by the employment in which I found her engaged. From a large
box of trinkets which stood before her, she was bedizening herself and a
pretty little fair-haired girl with every possible variety of bauble.
Each was decked with at least half a dozen necklaces, studded all over
with _mal-à-propos_ clasps and broaches, and shackled with a multitude
of rings and bracelets; so that they looked like two princesses of the
South Sea Islands. All this was surveyed with such gravity and
self-importance, as showed that the elder baby had her full share in the
amusement.

Mrs Boswell did not rise to receive me; but she stirred, which was a
great deal for Mrs Boswell. I made my obeisance with no very good will;
and told her, that hearing she wanted a governess for Miss Boswell, I
had taken the liberty to wait upon her.

Mrs Boswell only answered me by something which she intended for a
smile. Most smiles express either benevolence or gaiety; but Mrs
Boswell's did neither. It was a mere extension of the mouth; she never
used any other. 'My pretty love,' said she, addressing herself to the
child, 'will you go and tell Campbell to find my--a--my musk-box; and
you can help her to seek it, you know.'

'No, I won't!' bawled the child; 'for I know you only want to send me
away that you may talk to the lady about that nasty governess.'

'I an't going to talk about any nasty governess. Do go now, there's a
dear; and I'll take you out in the carriage, and buy you another new
doll,--a large one with blue eyes.'

'No you won't,' retorted miss; 'for you promised me the doll if I would
learn to write _O_, and you did not give it me then; no more will you
now.'

'A pretty ground-work for my labours!' thought I.

The altercation was carried on long and briskly, mingled with occasional
appeals to me. 'Miss Percy, did you ever see such a child?'

'Oh yes, madam,--a great many such.'

'She has, to be sure, such an unmanageable temper! But then' (in a half
whisper), 'the wonderfullest clever little creature! Now, do, Jessie, go
out of the room when you are bid.'

At last, command and stratagem being found equally unavailing, Mrs
Boswell was obliged to take the course which many people would have
preferred from the first; and proceeded to her business in spite of the
presence of Miss Jessie.

'Can you teach the _piano_?'

'I believe I understand music tolerably well; and though I am a very
inexperienced teacher, I would endeavour to show no want of patience or
assiduity.'

'And singing?' said Mrs Boswell, yawning.

'I have been taught to sing.'

'And French, and geography, and all the rest of it?'

I was spared the difficulty of answering this comprehensive question by
my pupil elect, who by this time had sidled close up to me, and was
looking intently in my face. 'You an't the governess your own self? Are
you?' said she.

'I hope I shall be so, my dear.'

'I thought you had been an ugly cross old thing! You an't cross. Are
you?'

'No. I do not think I am.'

'I dare say you are very funny and good-natured.'

Mrs Boswell gave me a glance which she intended should express sly
satisfaction. 'You would like to _larn_ music and every thing of that
pretty lady, wouldn't you?' said she to her daughter.

'No. I would never like to _larn_ nothing at all; but I should like her
to stay with me, if she would play with me, and never bother me with
that nasty spelling-book.'

'Well, she shan't bother you. Miss Percy, what terms do you expect?'

'These I leave entirely to you and Mr Boswell, madam. Respectable
protection is the more important consideration with me.'

'To be sure protection is very important,' said Mrs Boswell, once more
elongating her mouth; and she made a pause of at least five minutes, to
recruit after such an unusual expense of idea. This time I employed in
making my court so effectually to the young lady, that when her mother
at last mentioned the time of my removal to George Square, she became
clamorous for my returning that evening. A new set of stratagems was
vainly tried to quiet my obstreperous inviter; and then mamma, as usual,
gave up the point. 'Pray come to-night, if you can,' said she, 'or there
will be no peace.'



CHAPTER XXII

    _Dependence! heavy, heavy, are thy chains,
    And happier they who from the dangerous sea,
    Or the dark mine, procure with ceaseless pains,
    A hard-earned pittance--than who trust to thee._

                                             Charlotte Smith.


By some untoward fate, the government of husbands generally falls into
the hands of those who are not likely to bring the art into repute.
Women of principle refuse the forbidden office; women of sense steadily
shut their eyes against its necessity in their own case; warm affection
delights more in submission than in sway; and against the influence of
genius an ample guard is provided in the jealousy of man. Mrs Boswell
being happily exempt from any of these disqualifications, did her best
to govern her husband. There was nothing extraordinary in the attempt,
but I was long perplexed to account for its success, for Mr Boswell was
not a fool. The only theory I could ever form on the subject was, that
being banished during his exile in the colony from all civilised
society, having little employment, and none of the endless resource
supplied by literary habits, Mr Boswell had found himself dependent for
comfort and amusement upon his wife. She, on her part, possessed one
qualification for improving this circumstance to the advancement of her
authority; she was capable of a perseverance in sullenness, which no
entreaties could move, and no submissions could mollify. She had,
besides, some share of beauty; and though this was of course a very
transient engine of conjugal sway, she gained perhaps as much from the
power of habit over an indolent mind, as she lost by the invariable law
of wedlock. Finally, where authority failed, Mrs Boswell could have
recourse to cunning. A screw will often work where more direct force is
useless; and whatever understanding Mrs Boswell possessed was of the
tortuous kind. All her talents for rule, however, were exerted upon Mr
Boswell. Her child, her servants, any body who would take the trouble,
performed the same office for herself. Except when she was capriciously
seized with a fit of what she thought firmness, clamour or flattery were
all-prevailing with her.

The very first evening which I spent in her house, furnished me with a
specimen of her habits. 'Will you begin French with Jessie to-morrow?'
said she to me, with one of her most complaisant simpers.

'I should think, my darling,' said Mr Boswell, not much in the tone of a
master, 'that, if you please, it may be as well to exercise her a little
more in English first.'

'She can learn that at any time,' said Mrs Boswell, dismissing her
smiles.

'Don't you think she had better begin with what is most necessary?' said
the husband.

'We can't be losing Miss Percy's time with English,' returned the wife,
without deigning to turn her eyes or her head.

Mr Boswell paused to recruit his courage; and then said meekly, 'I dare
say Miss Percy will not consider her time as lost in teaching any thing
you may think for the child's advantage.'

'Certainly not,' answered I; for Mr Boswell spoke with a look of appeal
to me.

Mrs Boswell sat silent for five minutes, settling all the rings upon all
her fingers. 'Any body can hear the child read,' said she, at last,
without altering her tone or a muscle of her face.

'But Miss Percy's language and pronunciation are such admirable models,
that----' Mr Boswell stopped short, arrested by symptoms which I had not
yet learned to discern. The lady uttered not another syllable, nor did
she once raise her eyes till we were about to retire for the night.

'Shall I then give Miss Jessie a lesson in English grammar to-morrow
morning?' said I, addressing myself to Mr Boswell; merely from a feeling
that the father had a right to direct the education of his child.

'As--as you think best--as you please,' answered Mr Boswell
hesitatingly; and casting towards his spouse a glance of timid enquiry,
which she did not answer even by a look.

I attended her to her bedchamber, where to my great surprise she drew
me in and hastily locked the door; leaving Mr Boswell, who was following
close behind, to amuse himself in the lobby. She then seated herself;
and, with all the coolness in the world, began talking to me of negroes,
gold dust, and ivory. Presently Mr Boswell came, and gently requested
admission. Of this request the lady took no notice whatever. Some time
afterwards the summons was repeated, but still without effect. 'I am
afraid I exclude Mr Boswell,' said I, rising and wishing her good night.
'Oh never mind,' said the lady, nodding her head, and endeavouring to
look arch. Again I offered to go, but she would not allow me to move;
and as she had put the key of the room-door into her pocket, I had no
means of retreat. At last Mr Boswell, hopeless of effecting a lodgment
in his own apartment, retired to another; and as soon as the lady had,
by listening, ascertained this fact, she opened the door and permitted
me to depart.

For four days Mrs Boswell never honoured her lord with the slightest
mark of her notice. When he addressed her, whether in the tone of remark
or of conciliation, she gave no sign of hearing. She would not even
condescend to account for her behaviour by seeming out of humour; for to
me she was all smiles and courtesy; and towards poor Mr Boswell she
merely assumed an air of unconquerable nonchalance. It was in vain that
he acceded to his lady's plan for her daughter's studies. The obdurate
fair was not so to be mollified. At length, on the fifth morning, she
deigned to acknowledge his presence by a short and sullen answer to some
trifle which he uttered. His restoration to favour, however, went on
with rapid progression; and before evening the pair were upon the most
gracious footing imaginable. Being now admitted behind the scenes, I was
perfectly aware of the reason of this change. Mrs Boswell wanted money.

Indeed I was early made a sort of confidante; that is to say, Mrs
Boswell told me all her likings and dislikes, all her husband's faults,
and all her grounds of quarrel with his relations and her own. She
unfolded to me, besides, many ingenious devices for managing Miss
Jessie, for detecting the servants, and for cajoling Mr Boswell. I must
own I never could discover the necessity for these artifices; but there
is pleasure in every effort of understanding, and I verily believe these
tricks afforded the only exercise of which Mrs Boswell's was capable.

It is not to be told with what disgust I contemplated this poor woman's
character. Her uniform selfishness, her pitiful cunning, her feeble
stratagems to compass baby ends, filled me with unconquerable contempt;
a contempt which, indeed, I scarcely strove to repress. I imagined it to
be the natural stirring of an honourable indignation. I often repeated
to myself, that 'I would willingly serve the poor creature if I could.'
I always behaved to her with such a show of deference as our mutual
relation demanded, and thus concealed from myself 'what spirit I was
of.' To forgive substantial injury is sometimes less a test of right
temper than to turn an eye of Christian compassion upon the dwarfish
distortion of a mind crippled in all its nobler parts.

But of all Mrs Boswell's perversions, the most provoking was her
mischievous interference with my pupil. Either from jealousy of my
influence, or from the mere habit of circumvention, a sort of intriguing
was carried on, which the folly of the mother and the simplicity of the
child constantly forced upon my notice. Some indulgence was bestowed,
which was to be kept profoundly secret from the governess; or some
neglected task was to be slily performed by proxy. If the child was
depressed by a sense of my disapprobation, she was to be comforted with
gingerbread and sugar-plums; and then exhorted to wash her mouth, that
Miss Percy might not discover this judicious supply of consolation.

I believe it is a mistake to suppose that we are not liable to be angry
with those whom we despise. I know I was often so much irritated by the
petty arts of Mrs Boswell, that necessity alone detained me under her
roof. I was the more harassed by her folly; because, duty apart, I had
become extremely interested in the improvement of my young charge. The
_élève_ of such a mother was, of course, idle, sly, and self-willed; but
Jessie was a pretty, playful creature, with capacity enough to show that
talents are not hereditary, and such a strength of natural kindliness as
had outlived circumstances the most unfavourable to its culture. This
latter quality is always irresistible; and it was more particularly so
to an outcast like myself, who had no living thing to love or trust.

But for this child, indeed, Mr Boswell's house would have been to me a
perfect solitude. Mrs Boswell was utterly incapable of any thing that
deserved the name of conversation. Six pages a week of a novel, or of
the Lady's Magazine, were the utmost extent of her reading. She did
nothing; therefore we could have no fellowship of employment. She
thought nothing; therefore we could have no intercourse of mind. All
her subjects of interest were strictly selfish; therefore we could not
exchange sympathies. Either her extreme indolence, or a latent
consciousness of inferiority, made her averse to the society of her
equals in rank. Her ignorance or disregard of all established courtesies
had banished from her table every guest, except one old maiden relative,
whose circumstances obliged, and whose meanness inclined, her to grasp
at the stinted civilities of Mrs Boswell. To extort even the slightest
attention from Mr Boswell was, as I soon found, an unpardonable offence.
Thus, though once more nominally connected with my fellow-creatures, I
was, in fact, as lonely as when I first set foot upon a land where every
face was new, and every accent was strange to me.

In the many thoughtful hours I spent, what lessons did not my proud
spirit receive! All the comforts which I drew from human converse, or
human affection, I owed to a child. For my subsistence I depended upon
one of the most despicable of human beings. But my self-knowledge,
however imperfect, was now sufficient to render me satisfied with any
circumstances which tended to repress my prevailing sin; a temper from
which I even then endeavoured to forebode final, though, alas!
far-distant, victory.

Almost the only worldly interest or pleasure which remained for me to
forego, I found myself obliged to sacrifice to my new situation. I could
not introduce my pupil to the lowly habitation of my Highland friend;
and I was too completely shackled to go abroad alone. Thus ended my
expectations of reading Ossian in the original; and, what was perhaps a
greater disappointment, thus perished my hopes of surprising Mr
Maitland--if Maitland and I were ever again to meet. That we should meet
I believe I entertained an undefined conviction; for I often caught
myself referring to his opinions, and anticipating his decision.
Unfortunately this belief had no rational foundation. It was merely the
work of fancy, which, wandering over a world that to me had been
desolated, could find no other resting-place.

Though I had no longer leisure to pursue my Gaelic studies, I could not
entirely relinquish my interest in Cecil Graham; and I seized an hour to
visit and bid her farewell, one morning while Mrs Boswell and my pupil
were gone to purchase toys.

When I entered Cecil's apartment, she was kneading oat cakes upon the
only chair which it contained, the litter upon her table not leaving
space for such an operation; but on seeing me, she threw aside the
dough; and pulling down a ragged stocking from a rope that stretched
across the room, she wiped the chair, and very cordially invited me to
sit down. 'Don't let me interrupt you, Cecil,' said I.

'Oh it's no interruption, lady,' returned Cecil. 'I'm sure ye have a
lucky foot; and I was feared that I was no' to see you again, 'at I
was.'

'Why did not you come and visit me then Cecil?'

''Deed lady, I was at your lodging one day; and they told me you were
away, and where you were gone to; and I went two or three times and sat
with the childer' upon the step of the door to see if you would, may be,
come out; but I never had luck to see you.'

'Why did you not enquire for me?'

'I'se warrant, lady,' said Cecil, with a smile of proud humility, 'they
might have thought a wonder to see the like of me enquiring for you. But
much thought have I had about you. They say "cold is the breath of
strangers;" but troth, if you like to believe me, my heart warmed to
you whenever I saw you first.'

'Truly, Cecil, I like very much to believe you; for there are not many
hearts that warm to me.'

'I'se tell you, lady, the last time I saw you, ye were no like yoursel';
ye were a white's canna; and I just thought that, may be, an ill ee,
with your leave, had taken you.'

'Does an evil eye injure the complexion of any body except the owner,
think you, Cecil?' said I.

'An eye will split a stone, as they'll say in Glen Eredine,' said
Cecil, shaking her head very gravely. 'But I have something, if you
would please to accept; she hit mysel' just on the coat, with your
leave, one night going through under the face of Benarde.' While she
spoke she was searching about her bed, and at length produced a small
stone shaped somewhat like a gun flint. 'Now,' proceeded she, 'ye'll
just sew that within the lining of your stays, lady; or, with your
leave, in the band of your petticoat; and there'll nobody _can_ harm
you.'

'Thank you, Cecil. But if I rob you of this treasure, who knows how far
your own good fortune may suffer?'

'Oh laogh mo chridhe,' cried Cecil affectionately, 'it's good my part
to venture any thing for your sake; and if it just please Providence to
keep us till we be at Glen Eredine, I'll, may be, get another.'

I could not help smiling at Cecil's humble substitute for the care of
Providence, and inwardly moralising upon the equal inefficacy of others
which are in more common repute. But as a casual attempt to correct her
superstition would have been more likely to shake her confidence in
myself than in the elfin arrow, I quietly accepted of her gift;
enquiring when she would be in a situation to replace it.

'I don't know, lady,' answered Cecil with a sigh. 'The weather's clear
and bonny, and I am wearying sore for home; but--but I'm half feared
that Jemmy might no be easy, ye see, when he heard that I was at
Eredine.'

'How should it make your husband uneasy to hear that you were at home?'

'I don't know,' said Cecil, looking down with a faint smile, and
stopped; then sighing deeply, she proceeded, relieving her embarrassment
by twisting the string of her apron with great industry. 'Ye see, lady,
I have a friend in Glen Eredine,--I--I--'

'So much the better, Cecil. That cannot surely be an objection to your
going thither.'

'I mean,--I would say, a lad like that--I should have married, if it had
been so ordered.' Cecil stopped, and sighed again.

'And do you think your husband would scruple to trust you, Cecil?' said
I.

Her embarrassment instantly vanished, and she looked up steadily in my
face. 'No, no, lady!' said she, 'I'll never think such a thought of him.
He's no' so ill-hearted. But he would think that I might be dowie
there, and he so far away; for it's a sore heart to me, that the poor
lad has never been rightly himsel', since my father bade marry Jemmy.
And he'll no be forbidden to stand and look after me, and to make of
little Kenneth there, and fetch hame our cows at night. And ever since
my father died, he'll no be hindered to shear my mother's peats,
although I have never spoken one word to him, good or bad, since that
day that----'

Cecil paused, and drew her sleeve across her eyes. 'It was so ordered,'
said she, 'and all's for the best.'

'Yes, but, Cecil, were not you a little hard-hearted, to forsake such a
faithful lover?'

'Ochone! lady, what could I do? It was well kent he was no fitting for
me. His forbeers were but strangers, with your leave; and though I say
it, I'm sib to the best gentles in the land. So you see my father
would never be brought in.'

'And you dutifully submitted to your father!' said I, my heart swelling
as I contrasted the filial conduct of this untutored being with my own.

'Woe's me, lady,--I was his own;--he had a good right that I should do
his bidding. And besides that, I knew that Robert was no ordained for
me;--well knew I that,--that I knew well.' And while I was musing upon
my ill-fated rebellion, Cecil kept ringing changes upon these words; for
she would rather have repeated the same idea twenty times, then have
allowed of a long pause in conversation, where she was the entertainer.

'How did you discover,' I enquired at length, 'that there was a decree
against your marrying Robert?'

'I'se tell you, lady,' answered Cecil, lowering her voice; 'we have a
seer in Glen Eredine; and he was greatly troubled with me plainly
standing at Jemmy's left hand. And first he saw it in the morning, and
always farther up in the day, as the time came near. So he had no
freedom in his mind but to tell me. Well, when I heard it, I fell down
just as I had been shot; for I knew then what would be. But we must all
have our fortune, lady. No' that I'm reflecting; for Jemmy's a good man
to me; and an easy life I have had with him.'

'That is no more than you deserve, Cecil. A dutiful daughter deserves to
be a happy wife.'

'Well, now, that's the very word that Miss Graham said, when she was
that humble as to busk my first curch with her _oun_ hand; ay that's
what she did; and when she saw me sobbing as my heart would break;
hersel' laid her _oun_ arm about my neck; and says she, just as had I
been her equal, "My dear Cecil," says she. The Lord bless her! I thought
more of these two words, than of all the good plenishing she gave
me. But for a' that, I had a sorrowful time of it at the first; and a
sorrowfuller wedding was never in Glen Eredine, altho' Mr Henry was the
best man himsel'; for you see, Jemmy's his foster-brother.'

'The best man? Cecil; I do not understand you. I should have thought
the bridegroom might be the most important personage for that day at
least.'

Cecil soon made me comprehend, that she meant a brideman; whose office,
she said, was to accompany the bridegroom when he went to invite guests
to his wedding, and to attend him when he conducted his bride to her
home. She told me, that, according to the custom of her country, her
wedding was not celebrated till some weeks after she had taken the vows
of wedlock; the Highland husband, once secure of his prize, prudently
postponing the nuptial festivities and the honey-moon, till the close of
harvest brought an interval of leisure. Meanwhile, the forsaken lover,
whose attachment had become respectable by its constancy, as well as
pitiable by its disappointment, was removed from the scene of his
rival's success by the humanity of Henry Graham, who contrived to employ
him in a distant part of the country. But, in the restlessness of a
disordered understanding, poor Robert left his post; wandered
unconsciously many a mile; and reached his native glen on the day of
Cecil's wedding.

By means of much rhetoric and gesticulation upon Cecil's part, and
innumerable questions upon mine, I obtained a tolerably distinct idea of
the ceremonial of this wedding. Upon the eventful morning, the reluctant
bride presided at a public breakfast, which was attended by all her
acquaintance, and honoured by the presence of 'the laird himsel'.' I
will not bring discredit upon the refinement of my Gael, by specifying
the materials of this substantial repast, as they were detailed to me
with _naïve_ vanity by Cecil; but I may venture to tell, that, like more
elegant fêtes of the same name, it was succeeded by dancing. 'I danced
with the rest,' said Cecil, 'tho', with your leave, it made my very
heart sick; and many a time I thought, oh, if this dancing were but for
my lykwake.' The harbingers of the bridegroom, (or, to use Cecil's
phrase, the _send_,) a party of gay young men and women, arrived. Cecil,
according to etiquette, met them at the door, welcomed, and offered them
refreshments; then turned from them, as the prisoner from one who
brings his death-warrant, struggling to gather decent fortitude from
despair.

At last the report of a musket announced the approach of the bridegroom;
and it was indispensable that the unwilling bride should go forth to
meet him. 'The wind might have blawn me like the withered leaf,' said
Cecil, 'I was so powerless; but Miss Graham thought nothing to help me
with her _oun_ arm. Jemmy and I _may_ be lucky,' continued she, with a
boding sigh; 'but I am sure it was an unchancy place where we had luck
to meet;--just where the road goes low down into Dorch'thalla; the
very place where Kenneth Roy, that was the laird's grandfather, saw
something that he followed for's ill; and it beguiled him over the rock,
where he would have been dashed in pieces though he had been iron. The
sun never shines where he fell, and the water's aye black there. Well,
it was just there that Jemmy had luck to get sight of us; so then, ye
see, he ran forward to meet me, as the custom is in our country. Oh,
I'll never forget that meeting!' Cecil stopped, shuddering with a look
of horror, which I dared not ask her to explain. 'He took off his
bonnet,' she continued, 'to take, with your leave, what he never took
off my mouth before; but,--oh, I'll never forget that cry! It was like
something unearthly. "Cecil! Cecil!" it cried; and when I looked up,
there's Robert, just where the eagle's nest was wont to be; he was just
setting back's foot, as he would that moment spring down.'

'Did you save him?'

'I, lady! I could not have saved him though he had lighted at my foot. I
could do nothing but hide my eyes; and my hands closed so hard, that the
nails drew the very blood!'

'Dreadful!' I exclaimed, Cecil's infectious horror making the scene
present to me,--'could nobody save him?'

'Nobody had power to do ought,' answered Cecil, 'save Mr Henry, that's
always ready for good. He spoke with a voice that made the craigs shake
again; and they that saw his eyes, saw the very fire, as he looked
steadily upon Robert, and waved him back with's arm. So then the poor
lad was not so _un_sensible, but he knew to do _his_ bidding, for
they're no born that dare gainsay _him_. And then Mr Henry rounded by
the foot of the craig, and up the hill as he'd been a roe; and he caused
Robert go home with him to the Castle, and caused keep him there,
because he could no settle to work. No' that he's _un_sensible, except
when a notion takes him. There's a glen where we were used to make
carkets when we were herds; and he'll no let the childer' pluck so
much as a gowan there; and ever since the lightning tore the great oak,
he'll sit beside her sometimes the summer's day, and calls her always
"Poor Robert."'



CHAPTER XXIII

    _Not quite an idiot; for her busy brain
    Sought, by poor cunning, trifling points to gain;
    Success in childish projects her delight._

                        _----So weak a mind,
    No art could lead, and no compulsion bind.
    The rudest force would fail such mind to tame,
    And she was callous to rebuke and shame._

                                             Crabbe.


Cecil's tale, which included all the evening festivities,--the
ball,--the throwing of the stocking, and the libation of whisky, which
was dashed over the married pair, detained me so long, that Mrs Boswell
and my pupil were at home an hour before me. Mrs Boswell, however,
received me with her usual simper; and suffered the evening to arrive
before she began to investigate, with great contrivance and
circumlocution, the cause of my unusual absence. Though provoked at her
useless cunning, I readily told her where I had been. But, though the
lady had taken me into high favour, and made me the depository of fifty
needless secrets, I saw that she did not believe a word of my statement;
for Mrs Boswell was one of the many whose defects of the head create a
craving for a confidant, while those of the heart will never allow them
to confide. Perceiving that my word was doubted, I disdained further
explanation; and suffered Mrs Boswell to hint and soliloquise without
deigning reply.

The little dingy cloud, which scarcely added to their accustomed
dulness, was beginning to settle on the features of my hostess, when
another attack was made upon her good humour. My pupil, in a romping
humour which I could not always restrain, pulled out the comb that
confined my hair; which unfortunately extorted from Mr Boswell a
compliment on its luxuriance and beauty. Now Mrs Boswell's _chevelure_
happened to have an unlucky resemblance to that of a dancing-bear; a
circumstance which I verily believe her poor husband had forgotten, when
he incautiously expressed admiration of auburn curls. The lady's face
was for once intelligible; her lips grew actually livid; and for some
moments she seemed speechless. At last she broke forth. 'Her hair may
well be pretty,' said she; 'I am sure it costs her pains enough.'

With a smile, more I fear of sarcasm than of good-humour, I thanked her
for helping me to some merit, where I was ignorant that I could claim
any. Mrs Boswell, either fearing to measure her powers of impertinence
with mine, or finding sullenness the most natural expression of her
displeasure, made no reply; but sat for a full hour twisting the corner
of her pocket-handkerchief, without raising her eyes, or uttering a
syllable. At last, she suddenly recovered her spirits; and for the rest
of the evening was remarkably gracious and entertaining.

I was not yet sufficiently acquainted with Mrs Boswell to perceive any
thing ominous in this change. The next day, however, while I was alone
with my pupil, the child began to frolic round me with a pair of
scissors in her hand; making a feint, as if in sport, to cut off my
hair. A little afraid of such a play-thing, I desired her to desist;
speaking to her, as I always did, in a tone of kindness. 'Would you be
very sorry,' said she, clasping her arms round my neck, and speaking in
a half whisper, 'very, very sorry if all your pretty curls were cut
off?'

'Indeed, Jessie,' answered I smiling, 'I am afraid I should; more sorry
than the matter would deserve.'

'Then,' cried the child, throwing away the scissors, 'I won't never cut
off your hair; not though I should be bid a thousand thousand times.'

'Bid!' repeated I, thrown off my guard by astonishment; 'who could bid
you do such a thing?'

'Ah! I must not tell you that, unless you were to promise upon your
word----'

'No,' interrupted I. 'Do not tell me. Be honourable in this at least.
And another time, if you wish to injure me, do so openly. I will endure
all the little evil in your power to inflict, rather than you should
grow up in the habits of cunning.'

That a mother should thus lay a snare for the rectitude of her child,
must have appeared incredible, could the fact have admitted of a doubt.
I had still too many faults myself to look with calmness upon those of
others; and I was seriously angry. 'How is it possible,' thought I, 'to
form in this child the habits of rectitude, while I am thus provokingly
counteracted; and useless as I am compelled to be, how can I endure to
receive the bread of dependence from a creature whose mischief has
neither bound nor excuse, except in the weakness of her understanding?'
In the height of my indignation, I resolved to upbraid Mrs Boswell with
her baseness and folly, and then resign my hopeless task. But I had so
often and so severely smarted for acting under irritation, that the
lesson had at length begun to take effect; and I recollected that it
might be wise to defer my remonstrances till I could suppress a temper
which was likely to render them both imprudent and useless. I fear my
forbearance was somewhat aided by considering the consequences of
renouncing my present situation. However, when I was cool, I conducted
my reproofs with what I thought great address. I hid my offending
ringlets under a cap, and never more exposed them to the admiration of
Mr Boswell. It would have been mere waste of oratory to harangue to Mrs
Boswell upon the meanness of artifice; and rather uncivil, all things
considered, to talk to her of its inseparable connection with folly; but
I represented to her, that the time might come when her daughter would
turn against her the arts which she had taught. A fool can never divest
an argument of its reference to one particular case. 'If she should cut
off my hair,' said the impracticable Mrs Boswell, 'I shan't care much,
for wigs are coming into fashion.'

'But if even in trifles she learn to betray, how can you be sure that,
in the most important concerns of life, she will not play the
traitress?'

'Oh no fear,' cried Mrs Boswell, nodding her head as she always did when
she meant to look sagacious; 'I shall be too knowing for her, I
warrant.'

'A blessed emulation!' thought I.

Our dialogue was interrupted by the entrance of Mr Boswell, whose
features seemed animated by some incipient scheme. He took his place
beside his mate, and forthwith began to toy and flatter; looking,
however, as if he would fain have ventured to change the subject. At
length the secret came forth. He had met a college companion, with whom
he had a great inclination to dine that day. Mrs Boswell said nothing;
but she looked denial. Mr Boswell sat silent for a little, and then
renewed his manoeuvres. The praises of a favourite cap soothed the lady
into quiescence; for good-humour is too lively a term to express the
more amiable turns of Mrs Boswell's temper. The petitioner seized the
favourite moment. 'I should really like to dine with poor Tom Hamilton
to-day,' said he.

'Poor fiddlesticks!' returned the polite wife. 'What have you to do
dining with Tom Hamilton?'

'I don't know, my love: we have not met for twenty years; and he pressed
me so much to come and talk over old stories, that--that I was obliged
to give him a kind of half-promise.'

'Nonsense!' quoth the lady, with a decisive tone and aspect; and poor Mr
Boswell, with a sigh of resignation, moved his chair towards the
fire-place, and began to draw figures in the ashes.

Whether this operation assisted his courage, I know not; but, in about
ten minutes, he told me, in a half whisper, 'that, if I would entertain
Mrs Boswell, he rather thought he would dine with Tom Hamilton.'

'And why should you not? For a husband to go out, it is sufficient that
he wills it,' said I; parodying a maxim which was at that time the
watchword of a more important revolt. I fancy the smile which
accompanied my words was, for the moment, more terrific to Mr Boswell
than his lady's frown, for he instantly left us; and having secured his
retreat beyond the door, put his head back into the room, saying, with a
farewell nod, and a voice of constrained ease. '_Au revoir_, my darling!
I dine with Hamilton.'

'Why, Mr Boswell!' screamed the wife, in a tone between wrath and
amazement; but the rebel was beyond recall.

The lady was forthwith invested with an obstinate fit of the sullens.
Considering me as the cause of her husband's misconduct, she suffered
dinner and some succeeding hours to pass without deigning me even a look
or a word. My forte, certainly, was not submission; therefore, after
speaking to her once or twice without receiving an answer, I made no
further effort to soothe her, but amused myself with reading, work, or
music, exactly as if Mrs Boswell's chair had been vacant. She made
several attempts to disturb my amusement: she spilled the ink upon my
clothes. But though she made no apology, I assured her, with wicked
good-humour, that a farthing's worth of spirit of salt would repair the
disaster. She beat poor Fido; yet even this did not provoke me to speak.
She could not make me angry; because, by showing me that such was her
purpose, she engaged my pride to disappoint her. Left to itself, her
temper at last made a tolerable recovery; or, rather, she spared me,
that she might discharge its full venom upon Mr Boswell.

At a late hour the culprit returned; fortified, as it appeared, by a
double allowance of claret, but in high spirits and good-humour.
Forgetting that he was in disgrace, he walked as directly as he could
towards his offended fair; and, with a look of stupid kindness, offered
her his hand. The lady flounced away with great disdain. 'Come now, my
darling,' stammered the husband, coaxingly; 'don't be cross. Be a good
girl, and give me a kiss.'

'Brute!' replied the judicious wife, giving him a push, which, with the
help of the extra bottle, made him stagger to the other side of the
room. There he placed himself beside me; protesting that I was a sweet,
lovely, good-humoured creature, and that he was sure I had never been
out of temper in my life; with many other equally well-turned
compliments. This was the consummation of his misdeeds. Mrs Boswell
pulled the bell till the wire broke. 'Put that creature to bed,' said
she to the servant; 'don't you see he's not fit to be any where else?'
Mr Boswell was not so much intoxicated as to be insensible to this
indignity, which he angrily resisted; while, shocked and disgusted
beyond expression, I escaped from the scene of this disgraceful
altercation.

The next day Mrs Boswell had recourse, as usual, to silent sullenness;
to which she added another mode of tormenting. She constantly held her
handkerchief to her eyes, and affected to shed tears. All this, however,
was reserved for Mr Boswell's presence, as she soon discovered that it
was needless to waste either anger or sensibility upon me. Lest her
distress should not sufficiently aggravate the culprit's self-reproach,
she pretended that her health was affected by her feelings. It was
always one of her Lilliputian ambitions to obtain the reputation of a
feeble appetite. But now this infirmity increased to such a degree, that
Mrs Boswell absolutely could not swallow a morsel; nor, which was much
worse, could she see food tasted by another without demonstrations of
loathing. Nevertheless, she regularly appeared at table; and, for three
days, every meal was disquieted by the landlady's disgust at our
voracity.

Poor Mr Boswell, now completely quelled, did what man could do to
restore peace and appetite. He coaxed, entreated; and offered her, I
believe, all the compounds recorded in all the cookery books; but in
vain. Deaf as the coldest damsel of romance to the prayer of offending
love was Mrs Boswell. She retained her youthful passion for sweetmeats;
and her good-natured husband came one morning into her dressing-room
fraught with such variety of confections, that I was surprised at the
self-command with which she refused them all. I could not help laughing
to see him court the great baby with sugar-plums; she answering, like
any other spoilt child, only by twisting her face, and thrusting forward
her shoulder; nor was my gravity at all improved when Fido, making his
way into some concealment, drew forth the remains of a portly sirloin.

Mr Boswell looked as if he would fain have joined in my laugh; but he
foresaw the coming storm, and prudently effected his retreat. Mrs
Boswell's face grew livid with rage. She snatched the poker; and would
have struck the poor animal dead, had I not arrested her arm. 'Stop,
woman!' said I, in a voice at which I myself was almost startled;
'degrade yourself no further.' It is not the rage of such a creature as
Mrs Boswell that can resist the voice of stern authority. Her eye fixed
by mine as by the gaze of a rattle-snake, she timidly laid aside her
weapon; and shrunk back, muttering that she did not mean to hurt my dog.

From that time Mrs Boswell discovered a degree of enmity towards the
poor animal, which I could not have imagined even her to feel towards
any thing less than a moral agent. Not that she avowed her antipathy;
but I now knew her well enough to detect it even in the caresses which
she bestowed on him. She was constantly treading on him, scalding him,
tormenting him in every possible way, all by mere accident; and if I
left him within her reach, I was sure to be recalled by his howlings.
The poor animal cowered at the very sight of her. At last he was
provoked to avail himself of his natural means of defence; and one
evening, when she had risen from her sofa on purpose to stumble over
him, he bit her to the bone.

The moment she recovered from the panic and confusion which this
accident occasioned, she insisted upon having the animal destroyed, upon
the vulgar plea, that, if he should ever go mad, she must immediately be
affected with hydrophobia. Pitying her uneasiness, I at first tried to
combat this ridiculous idea; but I soon found that she was determined to
resist conviction. 'All I said might be true, but she had heard of such
things; and, for her part, she should never know rest or peace, while
the life of that animal left the possibility of such a horrible
catastrophe.' At last I was obliged to tell her peremptorily that
nothing should induce me to permit the destruction of my poor old
favourite,--the relic of better times, the last of my friends. I
humoured her folly, however, so far as to promise that I would find a
new abode for him on the following day. Mrs Boswell was relentlessly
sullen all the evening; but I was inflexible.

The only way which occurred to me of disposing of poor Fido was to
commit him to the care of Cecil Graham, at least till she should leave
Edinburgh. In the morning, therefore, I prepared for a walk, intending
to convey my favourite to his new protectress. My pupil was, as usual
eager to accompany me; and when I refused to permit her, she took the
course which had often led her to victory elsewhere, and began to cry
bitterly. This, however, was less effectual with me than with her
mother. I persisted in my refusal; telling her that her tears only gave
me an additional motive for doing so, since I loved her too well to
encourage her in fretfulness and self-will. Mrs Boswell, however, moved
somewhat by her child's lamentations, but more by rivalry towards me,
soothed and caressed the little rebel; and finally insisted that I
should yield the point. Angry as I was, I commanded my temper
sufficiently to let the mother legislate for her child; and submitted in
silence. But when we were about to set out, Fido was no where to be
found. After seeking him in vain, I would have given up my expedition;
but Mrs Boswell would not suffer Jessie to be disappointed, so we
departed.

I found Cecil's apartment vacant, and all its humble furniture removed.
I comprehended that she had returned to her native wilds; and I felt
that the connection must be slight indeed which we can without pain see
broken for ever! She was gone, and had not left among the thousands,
whose hum even now broke upon my ear, one being who would bestow upon me
a wish or a care. 'Poor feeble Ellen!' said I to myself, as I dashed the
tears from my eyes, 'where foundest thou the disastrous daring which
could once renounce the charities of nature, and spurn the intercourse
of thy kind?'

A natural feeling leading me to enquire into the particulars of Cecil's
departure, I made my way to an adjoining apartment, which was occupied
by another family.

On my first entrance, the noisome atmosphere almost overcame me; and,
unwilling to expose my little charge to its effects, I desired her to
remain without, and wait my return; but her morning's lesson of
disobedience had not been lost, and I presently found her at my side.

In answer to my enquiries, the people of the house told me that Cecil
had been gone for several days; but as to the particulars of her fate,
they showed an ignorance and unconcern scarcely credible in persons who
had lived under the same roof. Disgusted with all I saw, I was turning
away; when a groan, which seemed to issue from a darker part of the
room, drew my steps towards a wretched bed, where lay a young woman in
the last stage of disease. I had enquired whether she had any medical
assistance, and been answered that she had none,--I had bent over her
for some minutes, touched the parched skin, and tried to count the
fluttering pulse--before, my eye accommodating itself to the obscurity,
I perceived the unconscious gaze and flushed cheek which indicate
delirious fever. I turned hastily away; but more serious alarm took
possession of me, when I observed that my pupil had followed me close to
the bed-side, and in childish curiosity was inhaling the very breath of
infection. I instantly hurried her away, and returned home.

Though expecting that Mrs Boswell would throw upon me the blame which
more properly belonged to herself, I did not hesitate to acquaint her
with this accident; begging her to advise with the family surgeon
whether any antidote could still be applied. But Mrs Boswell was touched
with a more lively alarm than poor Jessie's danger could awaken. 'Bless
me!' she cried, 'did you touch the woman? Pray don't come near me.
Campbell! get me ever so much vinegar. Pray go away, Miss Percy. I would
not be near a person that had the fever for the whole world.'

'Were every one of your opinion, madam,' said I, 'a fever would be
almost as great a misfortune as infamy itself; but since you are so
apprehensive, Jessie and I will remain above stairs for the rest of the
day.'

At the door of my apartment I found poor Fido extended, stiff and
motionless. Startled by somewhat unnatural in his posture, I called to
him. The poor animal looked at me, but did not stir. 'Fido!' I called
again, stooping to pat his head. He looked up once more; wagged his
tail; gave a short low whine; and died.

Many would smile were I to describe what I felt at that moment; and yet
I believe there are none who could unmoved lose the last memorial of
friend and parent, or part unmoved with the creature which had sported
with their infancy, and grown old beneath their care. Fido was my last
earthly possession. Besides him I had nothing. I thank Heaven that the
greater part of my kind must look back to the deprivations of early
childhood, ere they can know what a melancholy value this single
circumstance gives to what is in itself of little worth.

My feelings took a new turn, when it suddenly occurred to me that my
poor old favourite owed his death not to disease, but to poison. His
appearance, as well as the suddenness of his death, confirmed the
suspicion. Strong indignation already working in my breast, I hastened
to question the servants. They all denied the deed; but with such
reservations, as showed me that they at least guessed at the
perpetrator. Breathless with resentment, and with a vain desire to vent
it all, yet to vent it calmly, I entered Mrs Boswell's apartment, and
steadily questioned her upon the fact. Mrs Boswell forgot her late
alarm, or rather my flashing eye was for a moment an over-match for the
fever. She changed colour more than once; but she answered me with that
forced firmness of gaze, which often indicates determined falsehood.
'She could not imagine who could do such a thing. She could not believe
that the animal was poisoned. She did not suppose that any of the
servants would venture. In short, she was persuaded that Fido died a
natural death.'

'That shall be examined into,' said I, still looking at her in stern
enquiry. Again she changed colour, and resumed her denials, but with a
more restless and evasive aspect. Presently my glance followed hers to
some papers which lay upon the table. I saw her as if by accident cover
them with her hand, then dexterously throw them upon the ground; and she
was just endeavouring to conceal them with her foot when I snatched up
one of them. I observed that it had been the envelope of a small parcel;
and turning the reverse, saw that it was marked with the word 'arsenic.'

Dumb for a moment with unutterable scorn, I merely presented the paper
to Mrs Boswell, and hearing her stammer out some lying explanation,
turned in disgust away. But indignation again supplied me with words.
'Find another instructor for your child, Mrs Boswell,' said I; 'I will
no longer tell her to despise treachery, and falsehood, and cruelty,
lest I teach her to scorn her mother.'

Then, without waiting reply, I left the room.

'Dost thou well to be angry?' said my conscience, as soon as she had
time to speak. I answered, as every angry woman will answer, 'Yes. I do
well to be angry. Vile were the spirit that would not stir against such
inhuman baseness!' This was well spoken,--perhaps it was well felt. Yet
I would advise all lofty spirits to be abstemious in their use of noble
indignation. It borders too nearly on their prevailing sin.

I soon recollected, that I had renounced my only means of support; but
it is a feeble passion which cannot justify its own acts. 'Better so,'
said I, 'than receive the bread of dependence from one whom I ought to
despise; or cling to an office in which I can perform nothing.'

I began, however, to look with some uneasiness to the consequences of my
rashness. I had neither home, property, nor friends. That which gives
independence--the only real independence--to the poorest menial, was
wanting to me; for I had neither strength for bodily labour, nor
resolution to endure want. Nor could I claim the irresistible
consolation of tracing, in the circumstances of my lot, the arrangements
of a Father's wisdom. My own temerity had shaped my fate. My own
impatience of human wickedness and folly was about to cut me off from
human support; and I, who had no forbearance for the weakness of my
brethren, was about to try what strength was in myself.

All this might perhaps pass darkly through my mind, but was not
permitted to take a determinate form. The sin, whatever it be, which
easily besets us, is to each of us the arch-deceiver. It is the first
which the Christian renounces in general, the last which he learns to
detect in its particulars. I had resolved to call my self-will 'virtuous
indignation;' for indeed my ruling frailty has had, in its time, as many
styles and titles as any ruler upon earth, though seldom like them
designed by its _Christian_ name.

It was an obvious escape from examining the past, to anticipate the
future. I had some experience of the difficulties which awaited me; and
knew how little my merits, such as they were, would avail towards the
advancement of an unfriended stranger. Yet the fearless buoyancy of my
temper supported me. I had now spent in Mrs Boswell's family three
months of weariness and drudgery, for which I had received no
remuneration; I concluded, of course, that she was my debtor for some
return, however small. Upon this sum I expected to subsist till some
favourable change should take place in my situation. How or whence this
change should come, I fancy I should have been puzzled to divine; so I
was content with assuring myself that come it certainly would.

At the beginning of my connection with Mrs Boswell, I had, with more
politeness than prudence, submitted the recompense of my services to her
decision. From that time she seemed to have forgotten the subject; and
delicacy, or perhaps pride, forbade me to bring it to her recollection.
It was now absolutely necessary to surmount this feeling; but it was
surmounted in vain. Mrs Boswell reminded me, that I had stipulated for
protection only; and declared, that she understood me as engaged to
serve her without any other reward. Confounded as I was at her meanness
and effrontery, I yet retained sufficient command of temper to address a
civil appeal to a faculty which, in Mrs Boswell's mind, was an absolute
blank; but argument was vain, and my only resource was an application to
Mr Boswell.

Well knowing that his lady's presence would give a fatal bias to the
scales of justice, I requested to speak with him in private. Unwilling
to shock him by a detail of his wife's baseness, I assigned no reason
for the resolution which I announced of quitting his family. I merely
submitted to his arbitration the misunderstanding which had arisen in
regard to the terms of my servitude. I had reason to be flattered by the
regret, perhaps I might rather say dismay, with which the good man heard
of my intended removal. With every expression of affectionate and
fatherly regard he entreated me to reconsider my purpose. He assured me,
that it was the first wish of his heart that his child should resemble
me; he said, that he could neither hope nor even desire to see another
obtain such influence as I had already gained over her; and that all his
prospects of comfort depended on the use of this influence. 'I need not
affect to disguise from you, my dear Miss Percy,' said he, 'that Mrs
Boswell, however willing, is not likely to assist much in forming
Jessie's temper and manners. The variableness of her spirits----'

'Spirits!' repeated I involuntarily.

'Well,' resumed Mr Boswell with a heavy sigh, 'perhaps I should rather
have said temper. But whatever it be, the more useless it makes her to
Jessie, and the more vexatious to me, the more have we both need of that
delightful gaiety, that blessed sweetness which breathes peace and
cheerfulness wherever you come. Dear Miss Percy, say that you will
remain with my girl, that you will teach her to be as delightful as
yourself, and you will repay me for ten of the most comfortless years
that ever a poor creature spent.'

Somewhat embarrassed by this strange sort of confidence, I answered,
that were I to accept the trust he offered I should only disappoint his
expectations, since all my influence with my pupil was as nothing
compared with that which was thrown into the opposite scale. I therefore
renewed my request, that he would enable me immediately to relinquish my
charge.

Mr Boswell employed all his rhetoric to change my resolution, but I was
inflexible. 'Well, well!' said he at last, with a sigh and a shrug, 'I
see how it is. The same confounded nonsense that has driven every
comfort from my doors for these ten years past is driving you away too.
Well, well! Hang me if I can help it. A man must submit to any thing for
the sake of peace.'

'Undoubtedly,' said I, suppressing a smile; 'while he finds that he
actually reaps that fruit from his submission.'

'Why as to that I can't say much. But bad as matters are, they might be
worse if I were as determined to have my own way as my wife is. I have
tried it once or twice, indeed; but--really her perseverance is most
wonderful!' Mr Boswell pursued the subject at great length; labouring to
convince me, or rather to convince himself, that where submission was
unattainable on the one side, the defect ought to be supplied by the
other; always inferring, from the necessary unhappiness of this
situation, that I ought not, by my departure, to deprive him of his only
remaining comfort. All he could obtain, however, was my consent to
continue in his family for a few days longer. In return, he promised the
full discharge of my claim upon Mrs Boswell, as soon as he should find
means to dispose of such a sum _peaceably_; that is, as soon as he could
by stealth abstract so much of his own property.

I suppose the pleasures of complaint increase in proportion to the folly
and impropriety of complaining. I never could otherwise account for the
frequent lamentations over the perfidy of lovers and the obduracy of
parents; nor imagine any other reason why Mr Boswell, having once
entered on the subject of his conjugal distresses, returned to it on
every possible occasion. In his wife's presence it was recalled to my
recollection by cautious hints, and by significant sighs and looks. In
her absence the theme seemed inexhaustible.

The embarrassment inflicted on me by this continual reference to a
secret was increased, when I perceived that Mrs Boswell, whose jealousy
in this instance supplied her want of penetration, suspected some
intelligence between her husband and myself. She was now, indeed, under
a stubborn fit of taciturnity; but I had at last learnt to read a
countenance which never forsook its stony blank, except to express some
modification of malevolence. I alarmed Mr Boswell into more caution; but
when the lady's suspicions once were roused, it was not in the most
guarded prudence, nor in the most open simplicity of conduct, to lull
them.

Unfortunately Mr Boswell and I soon found a more legitimate subject of
sympathy. The very day after her ill-fated visit to the abode of
disease, poor Jessie showed symptoms of infection; and before the week
expired, was pronounced to be in extreme danger. The mother, on this
occasion, showed a degree of anxiety, which was wonderful in Mrs
Boswell. She sent for nurse after nurse, and for doctors innumerable.
She made diligent enquiry after a fortune-teller, to unveil the fate of
her child; and she actually shed tears when the fire emitted a splinter
which she called a coffin. Stronger minds than Mrs Boswell's become
superstitious, when their most important concerns depend upon
circumstances over which they have no control. Finally, she questioned
every member of the family concerning the best cure for a fever, and
insisted that all their prescriptions should be applied. Fortunately,
however, no consideration could prevail upon her to superintend the
application. To approach the infected chamber, she would have thought
nothing less than _felo de se_;--therefore the poor little sufferer was
spared many unnecessary torments.

Mrs Boswell carried her dread of infection so far, that she would hold
no direct communication with any one who entered the sick room; and she
positively forbade her husband to approach his suffering child. But to
this interdiction the father could not submit. His visits were stolen,
indeed, but they were frequent; and he evinced on these occasions a
sensibility which could scarcely have been expected from the easy
indifference of his general temper. Often, while others were at rest,
did the father hang over the sick bed of his child; offer the draught to
her parched lips; and shed upon her altered face the tear of him who
trembles for his only hope.

To his kindness and his sorrow she was alike insensible. Her fondness
for me seemed the only recollection which her delirium had spared. She
would accept of no sustenance except from my hand. If I was withdrawn
from her sight, her eye wandered in restless search of something
desired; though when I appeared, it often fixed on me with a
heart-breaking vacancy of gaze. Thus circumstanced, I could no longer
think of deserting her. Indeed I never quitted her even for an hour; and
when wearied out I sunk to sleep, it was only to start again at her
slightest summons. These attentions, which I must have been a savage to
withhold, extorted from Mr Boswell the warmest expressions of
gratitude;--gratitude, which springs so readily in every human heart,
yet so rarely takes root there, and so very rarely becomes fruitful.

'God, reward thee, blessed creature!' said he once, when late in the
night we were separating at the door of the sick-room, where he had been
sharing the vigils of the nurse and me. 'My child's own mother forsakes
her, while you!--God reward you.' As he spoke, he clasped my hand
between his, and fervently pressed his lips to my forehead. But I
started with a confusion like that of detected guilt, when I perceived,
at a little distance, the half-concealed face of Mrs Boswell, scowling
malignity and detection. Whilst I stood for a moment in motionless
expectation of what was to follow, she darted forward, undressed as she
was; her lip quivering, her face void of all colour except a line of
strong scarlet bordering her eyelids. 'Mighty well!' cried she, in
accents half choked by something between a hysterical giggle and a sob.
'Mighty well, indeed! I knew how it was! I have seen it all well enough.
But I'm not such a fool as you think! I won't endure it--that I won't.'

Provoked by the recollection that this degrading remonstrance was
uttered within hearing of a domestic, I looked towards Mr Boswell for
defence; but seeing him cower like a condemned culprit, I was obliged to
answer for myself. 'What will you not endure, madam?' said I. 'Your own
preposterous fancy?--I know of nothing else that you have to endure.'

Mrs Boswell's natural cowardice always took part against her with a
resolute antagonist. 'I am sure,' said she, whimpering between fear and
wrath, 'I don't want to have any words with you, Miss Percy--only I
wish--I am sure it would be very obliging if you would go quietly out of
this house--and not stay here enticing other people's husbands----'

At this coarse accusation, the indignant blood rose to my forehead. But
the provocation was great enough to remind me that this was a fit
occasion of forbearance; and I subdued my voice and countenance into
stern composure, while I said, 'Woman! I would answer you, were I sure
of speaking only what a Christian ought to speak.' Then turning from
her, I took refuge from further insult in the apartment which I knew she
did not dare to approach.

There I sat down to consider what course I should pursue, I had been
insolently forbidden the house; and every moment that I remained in it
might subject me to new affront. The very attendants in the sick-room
could, with difficulty, restrain the merriment excited by Mrs Boswell's
ridiculous attack; and I felt as if the impertinence of their
half-suppressed smiles was partly directed against me. They had heard my
dismission; and every instant that I delayed to avail myself of it
seemed a new degradation. The most rooted passion of my nature,
therefore, urged my immediate departure; but I had now learned to lend a
suspicious ear to its suggestions. 'I shall never be humble,' thought I,
'if I resist every occasion of humiliation;' and when I looked upon the
altered countenance of my poor little charge, I could have endured any
thing rather than have withdrawn its last comfort from her ebbing life.
I resumed my place by her side, resolved never voluntarily to quit her
while my cares could administer to her relief.

My task was now of short duration. The very next day the physician
informed me that the crisis of the disorder was at hand; and that an
hour which he named would either bring material amendment, or lasting
release from suffering. I entreated that the anxiety of the parents
might not be aggravated by a knowledge of this circumstance; and
undertook myself to watch the event of the critical hour.

The day passed in silent suspense. Mrs Boswell did not dare to approach
me; and she contrived, by what means I know not, to keep her husband
away. I was truly thankful to be thus spared from contest; for I had
begun to feel the consequences of breathing the polluted air of
confinement. A heavy languor was upon me. My eyes turned pained from the
light. I was restless; yet I moved uneasily, for my limbs seemed
burdened beyond their strength. In vain I tried to struggle against
these harbingers of disease. Infection had done its work, and my
disorder increased every hour. The physician, at this evening visit,
observing my haggard looks, desired that I should immediately endeavour
to obtain some rest. But to sleep during the hour that was to decide
poor Jessie's fate, I should at any time have found impossible. I
watched her till the appointed time was past; saw her drop into the
promised sleep; sat motionless beside her during the anxious hours of
its continuance; and, with a joy which brightened even the progress of
disease, beheld her lifting upon me once more the eye of intelligence,
and beaming upon me once more the smile of ease.

Thinking only of the joyful news I had to tell, I ran to enquire for Mr
Boswell. He was in his dressing-room; and thither I hastened to seek
him. I entered; and told my tale, I know not how. 'Thank God!' the
father tried to say, but could not. He burst into tears. The first
words he spoke blessed me for having saved his child; the next expressed
his eager wish to see her. We were leaving the dressing-room together,
when we met Mrs Boswell. Her face growing livid with rage, and her voice
sharpening to something like the scream of a Guinea fowl, she exclaimed,
'Well! if this is not beyond every thing! To go into his very room! You
are a shameless, abominable man, Mr Boswell. But I will be revenged on
you--that I will.'

'I went into Mr Boswell's room, madam,' interrupted I, calmly, 'to tell
him that his daughter is out of immediate danger; and I was just going
to convey the same news to you.'

'Oh! no doubt but you'll be clever enough to find some excuse. But I
don't wish to have any thing to say to you, Miss Percy,--only I tell you
civilly, go away out of my house. I'm sure the house is my own; and it
is very hard if I can't--so go this moment, I tell you----'

She had gone too far. The mildest spirits are, when roused, the most
tremendous; and Mr Boswell's was, for the moment, completely roused.
Seizing her with a grasp, which made me tremble, 'Speak that again at
your peril, Mrs Boswell,' said he. 'Her stay depends upon herself,
whilst I have a roof to shelter her.' Then, throwing her from him, he
passed on, whilst I shuddered at perceiving that his grasp had wrung the
blood-drops from her fingers. The poor creature, terrified by this first
instance of violence, stood gazing after him in trembling silence.
'Compose yourself, Mrs Boswell,' said I, as soon as he was out of
hearing; 'I will immediately begone. I staid only for the sake of poor
Jessie; now, nothing would tempt me to remain here another hour.'

Spent with the exertion which I had made, I could scarcely reach my
chamber. I immediately began to collect my little property for removal;
but before my preparations, trifling as they were, could be finished, my
strength failed, and I sunk upon my bed.

A strange confusion seemed now to seize me. Black shadows swam before my
eyes, succeeded by glares of bloody light. The hideous phantoms crowded
round me, till my very breathing was oppressed by their numbers; and one
of them, more frightful than the rest, laid on my forehead the weight of
his fiery hand. Then came a confused hope that all was but a frightful
dream, from which I struggled to rouse myself. I spoke, as if my own
voice could dispel the terrible illusion. I endeavoured to rise, that I
might shake off this dreadful sleep. In an instant I was on the brink of
a fearful precipice, from which I shrunk in vain. Hands invisible
hurried me down the fathomless abyss.

Again I perceived that these horrors were illusory. I strove to convince
myself, that I was indeed in my own chamber, surrounded by objects
familiar to my sight. My mind rallied its last strength, to recall the
remembrance of my situation. Along with this, a dark suspicion of the
truth stole upon me.

'Merciful Heaven!' I cried, 'are my senses indeed wandering; and must I
be driven forth homeless while fever is raging in my brain! Forbid it!
Oh forbid it!'

By a violent effort I flung myself on my knees. With an earnestness
which hastened the dreaded evil, I supplicated an escape from this worst
calamity; and implored, that the body might perish before the spirit
were darkened. But ere the melancholy petition was closed, its fervour
had wandered into delirium.

A time passed which I have no means to measure; and I saw a female form
approach me. She seemed alternately to wear the aspect of my mother and
of Miss Mortimer; yet she rejected my embrace; and when I called her by
their names, she answered not. She clothed me in what seemed the chill
vestments of the grave; she hurried me through the air with the rapidity
of light; then consigned me to two dark and fearful shapes; and again I
was hurried on.

At last the breath of heaven for a moment cooled my throbbing brow. I
looked up and saw that I was in the hands of two persons of unknown and
rugged countenance. They lifted me into a carriage. It drove off with
distracting speed.

The succeeding days are a blank in my being.




CHAPTER XXIV

    _For he has wings which neither sickness, pain,
    Nor penury can cripple or confine.
    No nook so narrow, but he spreads them there
    With ease, and is at large. The oppressor holds
    His body bound; but knows not what a range
    His spirit takes, unconscious of a chain._

                                             Cowper.


I was awakened as from the deepest sleep, by a cry wild and horrible. It
was followed by shouts of dissonant laughter, unlike the cheering sounds
of human mirth. They seemed but the body's convulsion, in which the
spirit had no part. I started and listened;--a ceaseless hum of voices
wearied my ear.

A recollection of the past came upon me, mixed with a strange
uncertainty of my present state. The darkness of midnight was around me;
why then was its stillness broken by more than the discords of day? I
spoke, in hopes that some attendant might be watching my sick-bed;--no
one answered to my call. I half-raised my feeble frame to try what
objects I could discern through the gloom. High above my reach, a small
lattice poured in the chill night wind; but gave no light that could
show aught beyond its own form and position. As I looked fixedly towards
it, I perceived that it was grated. 'Am I then a prisoner?' thought I.
'But it matters not. A narrower cell will soon contain all of poor Ellen
that a prison can confine.' And, worn out with my effort, I laid myself
down with that sense of approaching dissolution, which sinks all human
situations to equality.

I closed my eyes, and my thoughts now flew unbidden to that unknown
world from which, in these days of levity, they had shrunk affrighted;
and to which, even in better times they had often been turned with
effort.

Presently a female voice, as if from the adjoining chamber, began a
plaintive song; which now died away, now swelled in mournful caprice,
till, as it approached the final cadence, it wandered with pathetic
wildness into speech. I listened to the hopeless lamentation;--heard it
quicken into rapid utterance, sink into the low inward voice, then burst
into causeless energy;--and I felt that I was near the haunt of madness.
The shuddering of horror came over me for a moment. But one thought
alone has power to darken the departing spirit with abiding gloom. The
worst earthly sorrows play over her as a passing shadow, and are gone.
'Poor maniac!' thought I, 'thou and the genius which now guides and
delights mankind will soon alike be as I am.'

But why record the feeble disjointed efforts of a soul struggling with
her clog of earth? Oh, had my strivings to enter the strait gate been
_then_ to begin, where should I, humanly speaking, have found strength
for the endeavour? My mind, weakened with my body, could feel, indeed,
but could no longer reason; it could keenly hope and fear, but it could
no longer exercise over thought that guidance which makes thinking a
rational act. Worn out at last with feelings too strong for my frame, I
sunk to sleep; and, in spite of the dreariest sounds which rise from
human misery, slept quietly till morning.

Then the daylight gave a full view of my melancholy abode. Its extent
was little more than sufficient to contain the low flock-bed on which I
lay. The naked walls were carved with many a quaint device; and one name
was written on them in every possible direction, and joined with every
epithet of endearment. Well may I remember them; for often, often, after
having studied them all, have I turned wearily to study them again.

As I lay contemplating my prison, a step approached the door; the key
grated in the lock; and a man of a severe and swarthy countenance stood
before me. He came near, and offered me some food of the coarsest kind,
from which my sickly appetite turned with disgust; but when he held a
draught of milk and water to my lips, I eagerly swallowed it, making a
faint gesture of thanks for the relief. The stern countenance relaxed a
little! 'You are better this morning,' said the man.

'I soon shall be so,' answered I, with a languid smile.

Without farther conference he was turning to depart; when, recollecting
that I should soon need other cares, and shrinking with womanly
reluctance from owing the last offices to any but a woman, I detained
him by a sign. 'I have a favour to beg of you,' said I. 'I shall not
want many.'

'Well!' said the man, lingering with a look of idle curiosity.

'When I am gone,' said I, 'will you persuade some charitable woman to do
whatever must be done for me; for I was once a gentlewoman, and have
never known indignity.'

The man promised without hesitation to grant my request. Encouraged by
my success, I proceeded. 'I have a friend, too; perhaps you would write
to him.'

'Oh yes--who is he?' said the man, looking inquisitively.

'Mr Maitland, the great West India merchant. Tell him that Ellen Percy
died here; and dying, remembered him with respect and gratitude.'

The man looked at me with a strong expression of surprise, which quickly
gave place to an incredulous smile; then turned away, saying carelessly,
'Oh, yes, I'll be sure to tell him;' and quitted the cell.

During that day, my trembling hopes, my solemn anticipations, were
interrupted only by the return of the keeper, to bring my food at stated
hours. But on the following day, I became sensible of such amendment,
that the natural love of life began to struggle with the hopes and the
fears of 'untried being.'

With the prospect of prolonged existence, however, returned those
anxieties which, in one form or another, beset every heart that turns a
thought earthward. The idea of confinement in such a place of
imprisonment, perhaps perpetual, mingled the expectations of recovery
with horror. To live only to be sensible to the death of all my
affections, of all my hopes, of all my enjoyments!--To retain a living
consciousness in that place where was no 'knowledge, nor work, nor
device.'--To look back upon a dreary blank of time, and forward to one
unvaried waste!--To pine for the fair face of nature! perhaps to live
till it was remembered but as a dream! Gracious Heaven! what strength
supported me under such thoughts of horror? Language cannot express the
fearful anxiety with which I awaited the return of the only person who
could relieve my apprehensions.

The moment he appeared, I eagerly accosted him. 'Tell me,' I cried, 'why
I am here: surely I am no object for such an institution as this. Mr and
Mrs Boswell know that my fever was caught in attending their own
child.'

'To be sure they do,' said the man soothingly.

'Why then have they sent me to such a place as this?'

The man was silent for a moment, and then answered, 'Why, what sort of a
place do you take it for? You don't think this is a madhouse, do you?'
Seeing that I looked at him with surprise and doubt, he added, 'This is
only an asylum, a sort of infirmary for people who have your kind of
fever.'

I now perceived that he thought it necessary to humour me as a lunatic.
'For mercy's sake,' I cried, 'do not trifle with me. You may easily
convince yourself that I am in perfect possession of my reason; do so
then, and let me be gone. This place is overpowering to my spirits.'

'The moment you get well,' returned the man coolly, 'you shall go. We
would not keep you after that, though you would give us ever so much.
But I could not be answerable to let you out just now, for fear of
bringing back your fever.'

With this assurance I was obliged for the present to be contented. Yet a
horrible fear sometimes returned, that he would only beguile me with
false hope from day to day; and when he next brought my homely repast, I
again urged him to fix a time for my release. 'I am recovering strength
so rapidly,' said I, 'that I am sure in a few days I may remove.'

'Oh yes!' answered he; 'I think in a fortnight at farthest you will be
quite well; provided you keep quiet, and don't fret yourself about
fancies.'

While he spoke, I fixed my eyes earnestly upon him, to see whether I
could discover any sign of mental reservation; but he spoke with all the
appearance of good faith, and I was satisfied.

My spirits now reviving with my health and my hopes I endeavoured to
view my condition with something more than resignation. 'Surely,' said I
to myself, 'it should even be my choice to dwell for a time amidst
scenes of humiliation, if here I can find the weapons of my warfare
against the stubborn pride of nature and of habit. And whatever be _my_
choice, this place has been selected for me by Him whose will is my
improvement. Let me not then frustrate his gracious purpose. Let me
consider what advantage he intends me in my present state. Alas! why
have I so often deferred to seasons of rare occurrence the lessons which
the events of the most ordinary life might have taught me?'

Carefully I now reviewed my actions, my sentiments, and my purposes, as
they had lately appeared to me in the anticipation of a righteous
sentence. What tremendous importance did each then assume! The work
perhaps of a moment seemed to extend its influence beyond the duration
of worlds. The idle word, uttered with scarcely an effort of the will,
indicated perhaps a temper which might colour the fate of eternity. In a
few days, I learnt more of myself than nineteen years had before taught
me; for the light which gleamed upon me, as it were from another world,
was of power to show all things in their true form and colour. I saw the
insidious nature, the gigantic strength, the universal despotism of my
bosom sin. I saw its power even in actions which had veiled its form;
its stamp was upon sentiments which bore not its name; its impression
had often made even 'the fine gold become dim.' Its baleful influence
had begun in my cradle, had increased through my childhood, had dictated
alike the enmities and the friendships of my youth. It had rejected the
counsels of Miss Mortimer; trifled with the affections of Maitland;
spurned the authority of my father; and hurried me to the brink of a
connection in which neither heart nor understanding had part. It had
embittered the cup of misfortune; poisoned the wounds of treachery; and
dashed from me the cordial of human sympathy. It had withheld gratitude
in my prosperity; it had robbed my adversity of resignation. It had
mingled even with the tears of repentance, while the proud heart
unwillingly felt its own vileness; it had urged, I fear, even the
labours of virtue, with the hope of earning other than unmerited favour.
It had eluded my pursuit, resisted my struggles, betrayed my
watchfulness. It had driven me from an imaginary degradation among 'mine
own people,' to desolation, want, and dependence, among strangers. When
were greater sacrifices extorted by self-denial, that 'lion in the way'
which has scared so many from the paths of peace? Even the employment,
which, by an undeserved good fortune, I had obtained, was degraded into
slavery by the temper which represented my employer as alike below my
gratitude and my indignation; while the pleasure with which pride
contemplates its own eminence had blinded me to the awful danger
denounced against those who cherish habitual contempt for the meanest of
their brethren.

I now saw that, even with the despised Mrs Boswell, I had need to
exchange forgiveness; since, against the evils which she had inflicted
on me, I had to balance a scorn even more galling than injury. Of the
injustice of this scorn I became sensible, when I considered that it
was directed less against her faults than her understanding; less
against the baseness of her means than the insignificance of her ends;
since what was at once the excuse and the mitigation of her vices formed
the only reason why they were less endurable to me than the craft and
the cruelty of politicians and conquerors. When I remembered that a few
hours of sickness had sufficed to reduce me in intellect far below even
the despised Mrs Boswell; that a derangement of the animal frame, so
minute as to baffle human search, might blot the rarest genius from the
scale of moral being; while I shrunk from the harrowing ravings of
creatures who could once reason and reflect like myself, I felt the
force of the warning which forbids the wise to 'glory in his wisdom.' I
admitted as a principle what I had formerly owned as an opinion, that
the true glory of man consists not in the ingenuity by which he builds
systems, or unlocks the secrets of nature, or guides the opinions of a
wondering world; but in that capacity of knowing, loving, and serving
God, of which all are by nature equally destitute, and which all are
equally and freely invited to receive.

The reflections of those few days it would require months to record.
They furnished indeed my sole business, devotion my sole pleasure. My
cell contained no object to divert my attention; and the stated returns
of the keeper were the only varieties of my condition. My strength,
however, gradually returned. I was able to rise from my bed, and to
walk, if the size of my apartment had admitted of walking.

It may well be believed that I counted the hours of my captivity, and I
did not fail to remind the keeper daily of his promise. It was not till
the day preceding that which he had fixed for my liberation, that I
discovered any sign of an intention to retract.

'To-morrow I shall breathe the air of freedom,' said I to him
exultingly, while I was taking my humble repast.

'I am sure you have air enough where you are,' returned the man.

'Oh but you may well imagine how a prisoner longs for liberty!'

'You are no more a prisoner than any body else that is not well. I am
sure, though I were to let you out, you are not fit to go about yet.'

'Though you were to----Oh Heaven! you do not mean to detain me still!
You will keep your promise with me!'

'Oh yes,' said the man, with that voice of horrible soothing which made
my blood run cold; 'never fear, you shall get out to-morrow;' and,
regardless of my endeavours to detain him, he instantly left me.

'You shall get out to-morrow,' I repeated a thousand times, in
distressful attempt to convince myself that a promise so explicit could
not be broken. Yet the horrible doubt returned again and again. Drops of
agony stood upon my forehead as I looked distractedly upon those narrow
walls, and thought they might inclose me for ever. 'God of mercy,' I
cried, casting myself wildly on my knees, 'wilt thou permit this? Hast
thou supported me hitherto only to forsake me in my extremity of need?
Oh no! I wrong thy goodness by the very thought.'

Well may our religion be called the religion of hope; for who can
remember that 'unspeakable gift' which every address to Heaven must
recall to the Christian's view, without feeling a trust which outweighs
all causes of fear? By degrees I recovered composure, then hope, then
cheerfulness; and when, at the keeper's evening visit, I had extorted
from him another renewal of his promise, I was so far satisfied as to
prepare myself by a quiet sleep for the trials which awaited my waking.

The next morning a bright sun was gleaming through my grated window; and
anxiously I watched the lingering progress of its shadow along the wall.
Long, long, I listened for the heavy tread of the keeper; thought myself
sure that his hour of coming was past; and dreaded that his stay was
ominous of evil. When at last I heard the welcome sounds of his
approach, and felt that at last the moment of certainty was come, a
faintness seized me, and I remained motionless, unable to enquire my
doom.

The man looked keenly at the fixed eye which wanted power to turn from
him. 'I thought as much,' said he triumphantly. 'I'll lay a crown you
don't wish to go out to-day.'

'Oh yes, indeed!' I cried, starting up with sudden hope and animation:
'I would go this instant!'

The man again examined my face inquisitively. 'Eat your breakfast then,'
said he, 'and put on these clothes I have brought you. I shall come back
for you presently.'

Language cannot express the rapture with which I heard this promise.
Overpowered with emotions of joy and gratitude, I sunk at the feet of
the keeper; pouring forth, in the fulness of my heart, blessings made
inarticulate by tears. Then recollecting how my suspicions had wronged
him, 'Pardon me,' I cried, 'oh pardon me, that ever I doubted your word.
I ought to have known that you were too good to deceive me.'

'Hush! quiet!' said the man knitting his brow, with a frown which forced
the blood back chill upon the throbbing heart; and in a moment he was
gone.

It was some time before I became composed enough to remember or to
execute the command which I had received; but my mysterious
apprehensions, my tumults of delight giving way to sober certainty, I
changed my dress, and sat down to await the return of my liberator. Then
while I recollected the horrible dread from which I was delivered, the
fate from which I seemed to have escaped, gratitude which could not be
restrained burst into a song of thanksgiving.

It was interrupted by the return of the keeper, who, without speaking,
threw open the door of my cell, and then proceeded to that of the one
adjoining. I sprung from my prison, and hurried along a passage which
terminated in the open air.

I presently found myself in a small square court, surrounded by high
walls, and occupied by twenty or thirty squalid beings of both sexes.
Concluding that I had mistaken the way, I returned to beg the directions
of the keeper. 'I am busy just now,' said he, 'so amuse yourself there
for a little; the people are all quite harmless.'

'Amuse myself!' thought I. 'What strange perversion must have taken
place in the mind which could associate such a scene and such objects
with an idea of amusement!' I had no choice, however; and I returned to
the court. I was instantly accosted by several unfortunate beings of my
own sex, all at once talking without coherence and without pause. In
some alarm I was going to retreat, when a little ugly affected-looking
man approached; and, with a bow which in any other place would have
provoked a smile, desired that he might be allowed the honour of
attending me. Little relieved by this politeness, I was again looking
towards retreat, when the party was joined by a person of very different
appearance from the rest. Large waves of silver hair adorned a face of
green old age, and the lines of deep thought on his brow were relieved
by a smile of perfect benignity; while his air, figure, and attire were
so much those of a gentleman, that I instantly concluded he must be the
visiter, not the inhabitant of such a dwelling.

Reproving the intrusion of the rest with an authority from which they
all seemed to shrink, he politely offered to attend me; and I accepted
of the escort with a feeling of perfect security.

While we walked round the court, my companion conversed as if he
believed me also to be a visiter. 'I sometimes indulge in a melancholy
smile,' said he, 'on observing how well the characteristics of the sexes
are preserved even here. The men, you see, are commonly silent and
contemplative, the women talkative and restless. Here, just as in that
larger madhouse, the world, pride makes the men surly and quarrelsome,
while the ladies must be indulged in a little harmless vanity. Now and
then, however, we encroach on your prerogative. The little man, for
instance, who spoke to you just now, fancies that every woman is in love
with him; and that he is detained here by a conspiracy of jealous
husbands.' He proceeded to comment upon the more remarkable cases;
showing such acquaintance with each, that I concluded him to be the
medical attendant of the establishment. This belief inspired me with a
very embarrassing desire to convince him of my sanity; and I endured the
toil of being laboriously wise, while we moralised together on the
various illusions which possessed the people round us, and on the
curious analogy of their freaks to those of the more sober madmen who
are left at large. Some strutted in mock majesty, expecting that all
should do them homage. Some decked themselves with rags, and then
fancied themselves fair. Some made hoards of straws and pebbles, then
called the worthless mass a treasure. Some sported in unmeaning mirth;
while a few ingenious spirits toiled to form baubles, which the rest
quickly demolished; and a few miserable beings sat apart, shrinking from
companions whom they imagined only evil spirits clothed in human form.
In one respect, however, all were agreed. Each scorned or pitied every
form of madness but his own. 'Let us then,' said I, 'be of those who
pity; since we too have probably our points of sanity, though where they
lie we may never know till we reach the land of perfection.'

'Perfection!' exclaimed my companion; 'is not its dawn arisen on the
earth! Are not the splendours of day at hand? That glorious light! in
which man shall see that his true honour is peace, his true interest
benevolence! Yes, it is advancing; and though the perverseness of the
ignorant and the base have for a time concealed me here, soon shall the
gratitude of a regenerated world call me to rejoice in my own work!'

'Sir!' said I, startled by this speech, which was pronounced with the
utmost vehemence of voice and manner.

'Yes!' proceeded he; 'the labours of twenty years shall be repaid!
Punishment and pain shall be banished from the world. A patriarchal
reign of love shall assemble my renovated children around their father
and their friend. All government shall cease. All----'

'Silence!' cried a voice of tremendous power; and immediately the keeper
stood beside us. He rudely seized the old man's arm, and the flush of
animation was instantly blanched by fear. I saw the reverend form of age
thus bow before brute violence, and I forgot for a moment that I was
powerless to defend. 'Inhuman!' I exclaimed; 'will you not reverence
grey hairs and misfortune?'

Without deigning me a look, the keeper led his captive away; while I
followed him with eyes in which the tears of alarm now mingled with
those of pity. He presently returned, and sternly commanded me to go
with him. Eager as I was for my dismission, I yet trembled while I
obeyed. We reached the door of my cell; and though I expected to pass
it, I involuntarily recoiled. 'Go in!' said the keeper, in a voice of
terrible authority.

'Here!' I exclaimed, with a start of agony. 'Oh, Heaven! did you not
say--did you not promise----'

'Ay, ay,' interrupted the man; 'but I must see you a little quieter
first. Get in, get in!'

'No, no! I will not! Though I perish, I will not!'

A withering smile crossing that dark countenance, he seized me with a
force which reduced me to the helplessness of infancy; and regardless of
the shriek wrung from me by hopeless anguish, he bore me into the cell,
shook off my imploring hold, and departed. I heard the dreary creaking
of the bolt; and I heard no more. I fell down senseless.

When I revived, I found myself supported by the arm of a person who was
administering restoratives to me. The first accents to which I were
sensible were those of the keeper; who said, as if in answer to some
question, 'She has been almost as high this morning ever.'

'So, so!' returned the other. 'Well! she'll do for the present, so I
must be gone. Keep an eye on her, and tell me how she comes on. And
harkye, give her a better place--if they don't pay for it, I will. I am
sure she is a gentlewoman.'

In the hope that I might now effectually appeal to justice or to pity, I
made a strong effort to rouse myself; but my compassionate attendant
was gone. The keeper, however, who perhaps was severe only from a
mistaken sense of duty, had been alarmed into treating me with more
caution. He watched me till I was completely revived; and as soon as I
could make the necessary exertion, removed me to a different part of the
building.

My new place of confinement, though somewhat larger and better furnished
than the first, was equally contrived to prevent all chance of escape.
But I quickly discovered that I had, by the change, gained a treasure,
which, whoever would estimate, must like me be cut off from the
sympathies of living being. A swallow had built her nest in my window. I
saw her feed her nurslings day by day. I watched her leaving her nest,
and longed for her return. Her twittering awoke me every morning; and I
knew the chirp which invited her young to the food she had brought.
Their first flight was an event in my life as well as in theirs; for the
interests of kindred are scarcely stronger than those which we take in
the single living thing, however mean, whose feelings we can make our
own.

Meanwhile I learnt from the keeper that the person to whose humanity I
owed the improvement in my situation was the surgeon who attended the
institution; and I looked forward to his next visit with all the
eagerness of hope. Remembering, however, the dependence he had shown on
the keeper's information, I became doubly anxious to remove the
impression which I saw was entertained against the soundness of my mind.
Alas! I forgot that it is not for the prejudiced eye to detect the
almost imperceptible bound which separates soundness of mind from
insanity.

'You assure me,' said I, one day, to my inexorable gaoler, 'that you
have no instructions to detain me here, and you promise that I shall be
dismissed the moment I am well: tell me how you propose to ascertain my
recovery.'

'Oh, no fear but I shall know that before you know it yourself.'

'But what reason have you to doubt that I am already in perfect
possession of my senses? I speak rationally enough.'

'Oh ay, I can't say but you have spoken rationally enough these three or
four days. They all do that, at times.'

'What other proof of my recovery can you expect? Here I have no means of
proving it by my actions.'

'Well, well. We'll see one of these days.'

'But if it be true that you have no wish to detain me, why must I linger
on in this place of horror? Put me to any proof you will. Propose, for
instance, the most complicated question in arithmetic to me; and see
whether I do not answer it like a rational creature.'

'I make no doubt. We have a gentleman here these fourteen years, that
works at the counting from morning to night.'

'Fourteen years! Good Heavens!--Oh try me for mercy's sake in any way
you please. Think of any experiment that will satisfy yourself;--let it
only be made quickly.'

The man promised; for he always promised. He thought it a part of his
duty. It is not to be told with what horror I at last heard that 'Oh
yes,' which always began the heart-breaking assents addressed to me as
to one whom it were needless and cruel to contradict.

All my anxieties were aggravated by the dread that his promises of
release were deceitful like the rest; and that even, though he had no
longer doubted of my recovery, the jealousy of Mrs Boswell might have
bribed him to detain me. I balanced in my mind the improbability of so
daring an outrage with the stories which I had heard of elder brothers
removed, and wives concealed for ever. Where much is felt and nothing
can be done, it is difficult indeed to fix the judgment.

To relieve my doubts, I enquired whether Mr Boswell knew of my
confinement. The keeper could not tell. He only knew that the petition
for my admission and the bond for my expenses were signed by Mrs Boswell
alone. This circumstance was quite sufficient to convince me that Mr
Boswell was ignorant of my fate; and I thought if I could find means to
make him acquainted with my situation, he would undoubtedly accomplish
my release. I implored of the keeper to inform him where I was; and he
promised, but with that ominous 'Oh yes,' which assured me the promise
was void.

By degrees, however, I had learnt to bear my disappointments with
composure. I must not venture to say that I was becoming reconciled to
my condition; I must not even assert that I endured its continuance with
resignation,--for how often did my impatience for release virtually
retract the submissions which I breathed to Heaven! But I had
experienced that there are pleasures which no walls can exclude, and
hopes which no disappointments can destroy; pleasures which flourish in
solitude and in adversity; hopes, which fear no wreck but from the
storms of passion. I had believed that religion could bring comfort to
the dreariest dwelling. I now experienced that comfort. The friend whom
we trust may be dear; the friend whom we have tried is inestimable.
Religion, perhaps, best shows her strength when she rules the
prosperous, but her full value is felt by the unfortunate alone.

Among my other requests to the keeper, I had entreated that he would
allow me the use of that precious book, which has diffused more wisdom,
peace, and truth, than all the works of men. He promised, as he was wont
to promise; but weary of a request which was repeated every time he
appeared, he at last yielded to my importunity. From that hour an
inexhaustible source of enjoyment was opened to me. Devotion had before
sometimes gladdened my prison with the visits of a friend; now his
written language spoke to my heart, answering every feeling. How
different was this solitude from the self-inflicted desolation which I
had once endured? Nay, did not the blank of all earthly interests leave
me a blessed animation compared with that dread insensibility which had
once left me without God in the world.

      'This is to be alone! This, this is solitude!'

But while I bore my disappointments with more fortitude, I did not, it
will easily be imagined, relax my endeavours after liberty. On certain
days, the institution was open to the inspection of strangers. On these
days I was always furnished with a change of dress, and led out to make
part of the show; and my spirit was for the time so thoroughly subdued,
that I submitted to this exhibition without a murmur, almost without a
pang. Circumstances had so far overcome my natural temper, that I more
than once appealed to the humanity of those whom a strange curiosity led
to this dreariest scene of human woe. But prejudice always confounded my
story with those which most of my companions in confinement were eager
to tell. I addressed it to an old man; he heard me in silence; then
turning to the keeper, remarked, that it was odd that one fancy
possessed us all, the desire to leave our present dwelling. 'Ay,' said
the keeper, 'that is always the burden of the song;' and they turned to
listen to the ravings of some other object. I told my tale to a youth,
and thought I had prevailed, for tears filled his eyes. 'Good God!'
cried he, instantly flying from a painful compassion, 'to see so lovely
a creature lost to herself and to the world!'

The ladies had courage to bear a sight which might shake the strongest
nerves, but not to venture upon close conference with me. They shrunk
behind their guards, whispering something about the unnatural brightness
of my eyes.

My only hope, therefore, rested upon the return of the humane surgeon,
and upon the chance that he might find leisure to examine me himself,
instead of trusting to the representation of the keeper. Yet, even
there, might not prejudice operate against me? I had felt its effects,
and had reason to tremble.

The day came which preceded his periodical visit to the department
whither I had been removed. It was a stormy one, and heavy rain beat
against my grated window. My swallows, who had tried their first flight
only the day before, cowered close in their nest; or peeped from its
little round opening, as if to watch the return of their mother. They
had grown so accustomed to me, that the sight of me never disturbed
them. In the pride of my heart I showed them to the keeper when he
brought my morning repast. 'Who knows,' said I, 'if the doctor come
to-morrow, but they and I may take our departure together.' As I spoke,
a gust of the storm loosened the little fabric from its hold. I sprung
in consternation to the window. The ruin was complete; my treasure was
dashed to the ground. Let those smile who can, when I own that I uttered
a cry of sorrow; and, renouncing my unfinished meal, threw myself on my
bed and wept.

'Help the girl!' exclaimed the keeper. 'A woman almost as big as I am,
crying for a swallow's nest. Well, as I shall answer, I thought you had
got quite well almost.'

Aware too late of the impression which my ill-timed weakness had given,
I did my utmost, at his subsequent visits, to repair my error; but
prejudice, even in its last stage of decay, is more easily revived than
destroyed, and I saw that he remained at best sceptical.

The day came which was to decide my fate. No lover waiting the sentence
of a cautious mistress,--no gamester pausing in dread to look at the
decisive die,--no British mother trembling with the Gazette in her
hand,--ever felt such anxiety as I did, at the approach of my medical
judge. With as much coherence, however, as I could command, I related to
him the circumstances to which I attributed my confinement. He heard me
with attention, questioned, and cross-examined me. 'Have you any
objection,' said he, 'to my making enquiries of Mr Boswell?'

'None, certainly,' said I, 'if you cannot otherwise convince yourself
that I ought to be set at liberty; else I should be unwilling to add to
his domestic discomfort. I am persuaded that he has no part in this
cruelty.'

The surgeon remained with me long; talking on various subjects, and
ingeniously contriving to withdraw my attention from the ordeal which I
was undergoing. The keeper, to justify his own sagacity, detailed with
exaggeration every instance he had witnessed of my supposed
eccentricity. 'To this good day,' said he, 'she'll be crying one minute,
and singing the next.'

'Mr Smith,' said the doctor, shaking his head gravely, 'if you shut up
all the women who change their humour every minute, who will make our
shirts and puddings?'

He related the transports of my premature gratitude. 'By the time you
are a little older, Miss Percy,' said the doctor, 'you will guess better
how far sympathy will go; and then you will not run the risk of being
thought crazy, by showing more sensibility than other people.'

Other instances of my extravagance were not more successful; for the
doctor's prejudice had fortunately taken the other side. 'You know, Mr
Smith,' said he, 'that I always suspected this was not a case for your
management; and that if I had been in the way when admission was asked
for this lady, she would never have been here.' My departure was
therefore authorised; and, at my earnest request, it was fixed for that
day.

And who shall paint the rapture of the prisoner, who tells himself, what
yet he scarcely dares believe, 'This day I shall be free?' Who shall
utter the gratitude which swells the heart of him whom this day has made
free? That I was to go I knew not whither,--to subsist I knew not
how,--could not damp the joys of deliverance. The wide world was indeed
before me; but even that of itself was happiness. The free air,--the
open face of heaven,--the unfettered grace of nature,--the joyous sport
of animals,--the cheerful tools of man,--sounds of intelligence, and
sights of bliss were there; and the wide world was to me, the native
land of the exile, lovely with every delightful recollection, and
populous with brethren and friends.


CHAPTER XXV

    _Oh! grief has changed me since you saw me last;
    And careful hours, and time's deforming hand
    Have written strange defeatures in my face._

                                             Shakspeare.


Though I resisted all idea of returning, even for an hour, to the
control of Mrs Boswell, it was thought necessary, since I had been
confined upon her authority and at her expense, that, before my
departure, she should be informed of my recovery, and consequent
dismission. After waiting impatiently the return of a message despatched
for this purpose; I learnt that Mr Boswell's house was shut up; the
whole family having removed to the country. My kind friend, Dr ----,
however, would not permit this to retard my departure. He undertook for
Mrs Boswell's performance of her engagement; which, he said, he could
easily compel, by threatening to expose her conduct. For my part, I had
no doubt that she had fled from the fear of detection, and with the
design of preventing her husband from discovering the barbarity she had
practised; for I knew that it was not the love of rural life, nor even
of the fashion, which could have roused Mrs Boswell to the exertion of
travelling fifty miles.

So far as I was concerned, however, her precaution was unnecessary; for
she had injured me too seriously to have any return of injury to fear.
Nothing short of necessity could have induced me to expose her, while I
saw reason to dread that self-deceit might, under the name of justice,
countenance the spirit of revenge. The only reason I had to regret her
departure was, that I was thus prevented from receiving the money which
Mr Boswell had acknowledged to be my right. Every thing else which
could be called mine had been sent with me from the house, and was now
faithfully restored to me. Feeble indeed must have been the honesty to
which my possessions could have furnished a temptation! The whole
consisted in a few shillings, and a scanty assortment of the plainest
attire. And yet the heir of the noblest domain never looked round him
with such elation as I did, when I once more found myself under the open
canopy of heaven; nor did ever the 'harp and the viol' delight the ear
like the sound of the heavy gate which closed upon my departing steps. I
paused for a moment, to ask myself if all was not a dream; then leant my
forehead against the threshold, and wept the thanksgiving I could not
utter.

I was roused by an enquiry from the person who was carrying my
portmanteau, 'whither I chose to have it conveyed?' The only residence
which had occurred to me, the only place with which I seemed entitled to
claim acquaintance, was my old abode at Mrs Milne's; and I desired the
man to conduct me thither.

Though the gladness of my heart disposed me to good-humour with every
living thing, I could not help observing that my landlady received me
coolly. To my enquiry whether my former apartment was vacant, I could
scarcely obtain an intelligible reply; and when I requested that, if she
could not accommodate me, she would recommend another lodging-house to
me, the flame burst forth. She told me 'that she had had enough of
recommending people she knew nothing about. Mrs Boswell had very near
turned away her sister for recommending me already.' I assured the woman
that I should have sincerely regretted being the occasion of any
misfortune to her sister; and declared that I was utterly unconscious of
having ever done discredit to her recommendation. 'It might be so,' the
landlady said, 'but she did not know; it seemed very odd that I had been
sent away in a hurry from Mr Boswell's, and that I had never been heard
of from that day to this. To be sure,' said she, 'it was no wonder that
Mrs Boswell dismissed a person who had brought so much distress and
trouble into the family, and almost been the death of both Mr Boswell
and little miss.'

'Mr Boswell! did he catch the infection too?'

'To be sure he did; and so I dare say would the whole house, if you had
not been sent away.'

I expressed my unfeigned sorrow for the mischief which I had innocently
caused; for I was at this moment less disposed to resent impertinence
than to sympathise in the joys and sorrows of all human kind.

My landlady's countenance at last relaxed a little; and either won by my
good-humour, or prompted by her curiosity to discover my adventures
during my mysterious disappearance, or by a desire to dispose of her
lodging at a season when they were not very disposable, she told me that
I might, if I chose, take possession of my former accommodation. With
this ungracious permission I was obliged to comply; for the day was
already closing, and my scarcely recovered strength was fast yielding to
fatigue.

I was aware, however, that in those lodgings it was impossible for me,
with only my present funds, to remain; for humble as were my
accommodations, they were far too costly for my means of payment. Mr
Boswell had, indeed, acknowledged himself my debtor for a sum, which, in
my situation, appeared positive riches; but my prospect of receiving it
was so small, or at least so distant, that I dared not include the
disposal of it in any plan for the present. That I might not, however,
lose it by my own neglect, I immediately wrote to remind Mr Boswell of
his promise, and to acquaint him whither he might transmit the money. I
had no very sanguine hopes that this letter would ever reach the person
for whom it was intended; and was more sorry than surprised, when day
after day passed, and brought no answer.

In the mean time, I made every exertion to obtain a new situation. I
enquired for Mrs Murray; and found that she was still in England, where
she had been joined by her son. I went unwittingly to the house of her
repulsive sister; and found, to my great relief, that it was, like half
the houses in its neighbourhood, deserted for the season. It was in vain
that I endeavoured to procure employment as a teacher. The season was
against my success. The town was literally empty; for though this is a
mere figure of speech when applied to London, it becomes a matter of
fact in Edinburgh. Besides, I had no introduction; and I believe there
is no place under Heaven where an introduction is so indispensable.
Without it, scarcely the humblest employment was to be obtained. Had I
asked for alms, I should probably have been bountifully supplied; but
the charity which in Scotland is bestowed upon a nameless stranger, is
not of that kind which 'thinketh no evil.'

Observing one day in the window of a toy-shop some of those ingenious
trifles, in the making of which I had once been accustomed to amuse
myself, I offered to supply the shop with as many of them as I could
manufacture. The shopman received my proposal coolly. Had I ordered the
most expensive articles of his stock, they would probably have been
intrusted to me without hesitation; but even he seemed to think that
pin-cushions and work-baskets must be made only by persons of
unequivocal repute. At last, though he would not intrust me with his
materials, he permitted me to work with my own; promising that, if my
baubles pleased him, he would purchase them. Even for this slender
courtesy I was obliged to be thankful; for I had now during a week
subsisted upon my miserable fund, and, in spite of the most rigid
economy, it was exhausted. The price of my lodging too for that week was
still undischarged; and it only remained to choose what part of my
little wardrobe should be applied to the payment of this debt.

The choice was difficult; for nothing remained that could be spared
without inconvenience; and when it was at length fixed, I was still
doubtful how I should employ this last wreck of my possessions. I was
strongly tempted to use it in the purchase of materials for the work I
had undertaken; because I expected that in this way it might swell into
a fund which might not only repay my landlady, but contribute to my
future subsistence. But, fallen as I was, I could not condescend to
hazard, without permission, what was now, in fact, the property of
another: and, humbled as I had been, my heart revolted from owing the
use of my little capital to the forbearance of one from whom I could
scarcely extort respect. Once more, however, stubborn nature was forced
to bow; for, between humiliation and manifest injustice, there was no
room for hesitation; and I summoned my landlady to my apartment. 'Mrs
Milne,' said I, 'I can this evening pay what I owe you; and I can do no
more. I shall then have literally nothing.'

The woman stood staring at me with a face of curious surprise; for this
was the first time that I had ever spoken to her of my circumstances or
situation. 'If you choose to have your money,' I continued, 'it is
yours. If you prefer letting it remain with me for a few days longer, it
will procure to me the means of subsistence, and to you the continuance
of a tenant for your apartment.'

After enquiring into my plan with a freedom which I could ill brook, Mrs
Milne told me, 'that she had no wish to be severe upon any body; and
therefore would, for the present, be content with half her demand.' This
arrangement made, nothing remained except to procure the money; and,
for this purpose, I hasted to the place which I had formerly visited on
a similar errand.

It was a shop little larger than a closet, dark, dirty, and confused;
and yet, I believe, Edinburgh, at that time, contained none more
respectable in its particular line. Some women, apparently of the lowest
rank, were searching for bargains among the trash which lay upon the
counter; while others seemed waiting to add to the heap. All bore the
brand of vice and wretchedness. Their squalid attire, their querulous or
broken voices, their haggard and bloated countenances, filled me with
dread and loathing.

Having despatched my business, I was hastening to depart, when I was
arrested by a voice less ungentle than the others. It spoke in a
melancholy importunate half whisper; but it spoke in the accents of my
native land, and I started as if at the voice of a friend. The face of
the speaker was turned away from me. Her figure, too, was partly
concealed by a cloak, tawdry with shreds of what had once been lace. An
arm, on which the deathy skin clung to the bones, dragged rather than
supported a languid infant. She seemed making a last effort to renew a
melancholy pleading. 'If it were but the smallest trifle, sir,' said
she.

'I tell you woman, I cannot afford it,' was the answer. 'You have had
more than the gown is worth already.'

'God help me then,' said the woman, 'for I must perish;' and she turned
to be gone. The light rested upon her features. Altered as they were,
they could not be forgotten. 'Juliet! Miss Arnold!' I exclaimed; and the
long tale of credulity and ingratitude passed across my mind in an
instant. I stood gazing upon her for a moment. Sickness, want and
sorrow, were written in her face. I remembered it bright with all the
sportive graces of youth and gaiety. The contrast overcame me. 'Juliet!
dear Juliet!' I cried, and fell upon her neck.

Strong emotion long kept me silent; while she seemed overpowered by
surprise. At length she recovered utterance. 'Ah, Ellen!' said she, 'you
are avenged on me now.'

'Avenged! oh, Juliet!'

It was then that I remembered the vengeance which I had imprecated upon
her head; and it was she who was avenged!

When I again raised my eyes to her face, it was crossed by a faint
flush; and she looked down as if with shame upon her wretched attire. 'I
am sadly changed since you saw me last, Miss Percy,' said she.

I could not bear to own the horrible truth of her words. 'Let us leave
this place,' said I. 'Come where you may tell me what has caused this
wreck.'

I offered her my arm, and, with a look of surprise, she accepted it.
'Sure,' said she, 'you must be ashamed to be seen with a person of my
appearance.'

'Can you imagine,' said I, 'that appearance is in my thoughts at such a
moment as this?' and vexed and chilled by this cold attention to
trifles, I silently conducted her towards my home.

It was at a considerable distance from the place of our meeting; and the
strength of my companion was scarcely equal to the journey. We had not
gone far before she stopped, arrested by the breathlessness of
consumption. Alarmed, I held out my arms to relieve her from the burden
of the infant. Then first a painful suspicion struck a sickness to my
heart. I looked at her, then at the child, and feared to ask if it was
her own. She seemed to interpret the look, for a blush deepened the
hectic upon her cheek. 'My boy is not the child of shame, Miss Percy,'
said she. My breast was lightened of a load--I pressed her arm to me,
and again we went on.

We at length reached my lodgings; and, regardless of the suspicious
looks which were cast upon us by the people of the house, I led Miss
Arnold to my apartment, and shared with her the last refreshment I could
command. During our repast, I could not help observing that the change
in Miss Arnold's appearance had but partially extended to her manners.
She was no sooner a little revived than she began to find occasions of
flattering me upon my improved beauty, which she hinted had become only
more interesting by losing the glow of health.

'In one respect, Juliet,' said I coldly, 'you will find me changed. I
have lost my taste for compliments.' Then fearing I had spoken with
severity, I added more gaily, 'Besides, you can talk of me at any time.
Now tell me rather why I find you here so far from home, so much--tell
me every thing that it will not pain you to tell.'

Miss Arnold showed no disinclination to enter on her tale. She told me
that, in consequence of her intimacy with Lady St Edmunds, she had,
after leaving me, _necessarily_ improved her acquaintance with her
Ladyship's niece, Lady Maria de Burgh. A smile of self-complacency
crossed her wasted face as she told me that a very few interviews had
served to dispel all Lady Maria's prejudices against her. 'But to be
sure,' added she, 'Lady Maria is such a fool, that I had no great glory
in changing her opinion.' I remembered with a sigh the time when this
comment would have given me pleasure; but I did not answer; and Miss
Arnold went on to relate, that Lady Maria soon pressed her, with such
unwearied importunity to become her guest, that the invitation was
absolutely not to be resisted without incivility.

Lord Glendower was at that time Lady Maria's suitor; or rather, Miss
Arnold said, he talked and trifled in such a way, that her Ladyship was
in anxious expectation of his becoming so. 'However,' continued she, 'I
soon saw that, had our situations been equal, he might have preferred me
to his would-be bride.'

She stopped, but I waited in silence the continuation of her story. 'You
know, Ellen,' said she, 'it was not to be supposed that I would neglect
so splendid a prospect. I had no obligation to Lady Maria which bound me
to sacrifice my happiness.'

'Happiness!' repeated I involuntarily, while I recollected my humble
estimate of Lord Glendower's talents for bestowing it.

'Any thing, you know, was happiness,' said Miss Arnold, 'compared with
the life of dependence and subjection which I must have endured with my
brother.' She went on detailing innumerable circumstances which seemed
to lay her under a kind of necessity to encourage Lord Glendower.

'Ay, ay, Juliet,' interrupted I, 'as Mr Maitland used to say, we ladies
can always make up in the number of our reasons whatever they want in
weight.'

Miss Arnold seemed to feel some difficulty in proceeding to the next
step of her narrative. 'At last,' said she, hesitating, 'it was
agreed;--I consented to--to go with Glendower to Scotland.'

'To Scotland! Was not Lord Glendower his own master? Could he not marry
where he pleased?'

'It was his wish,' said Miss Arnold, blushing and hesitating; 'and--and
you know, Ellen, when a woman is attached--you know----'

'Don't appeal to my knowledge, Juliet, for I never was attached, and
never shall be.'

A pause followed; and it was only at my request that Miss Arnold went on
with her story. 'When we arrived here,' said she, 'I found Glendower's
attentions were not what I expected. You may judge of my despair! I
knew, though I was innocent, nobody would believe my innocence;--I saw
that I was as much undone as if I had been really guilty.'

'Oh no, Juliet!' cried I, 'there is, indeed, only one step between
imprudence and guilt; but that one is the passage from uneasiness to
misery, abiding misery. But what did you resolve upon?'

'What could I do, Ellen? A little dexterity is the only means of defence
which we poor women possess.'

'Any means of defence was lawful,' said I rashly, 'where all that is
valuable in this world or the next was to be defended.'

'Certainly,' said Miss Arnold. 'Therefore, what I did cannot be blamed.
I had heard something of the Scotch laws in regard to marriage; and I
refused to see Glendower, unless he would at least persuade the people
of the lodging-house that I was his wife. Afterwards, I contrived to
make him send me a note, addressed to Lady Glendower. The note itself
was of no consequence, but it answered the purpose, and I have preserved
it. I took care, too, to ascertain that the people about us observed him
address me as his wife; and in Scotland this is as good as a thousand
ceremonies. Besides, you know, Ellen, a ceremony is nothing. Whatever
joins people irrevocably, is a marriage in the sight of God and man.'

'Yes,' answered I, 'provided that both parties understand themselves to
be irrevocably bound.'

Miss Arnold averted her eye for a moment; then looked up more steadily,
and went on with her story. 'After this, I had no hesitation to
accompany him to a shooting lodge, which he had hired, in the Highlands.
We were there some months: I am sure I was heartily sick of it. In
winter last we came here, and Glendower talked of going to town; but I
was not able, nor indeed much inclined to go with him; he has got into
such a shocking habit of drinking. So he left me here, promising to come
back after I was confined; but he had not been gone above two months,
when I saw in a newspaper an account of his marriage with Lady Maria. It
came upon me like a thunder-stroke. The shock brought on a premature
confinement, and I was long in extreme danger. However, I dictated
letters both to Glendower and Lady Maria, asserting my claims, and
declaring that, if they were resisted, the law should do me justice. I
wrote often before I could obtain an answer; and at last Glendower had
the effrontery to write, denying that I had any right over him. He had
even the cruelty to allege, that the time of my poor little boy's birth
in part refuted my story.' Juliet, who had hitherto told her tale with
astonishing self-possession, now burst into tears. 'As I hope for mercy,
Ellen,' said she, folding her infant to her breast with all the natural
fondness of a mother,--'as I hope for mercy, this boy is Glendower's;
and, as I truly believe, is his only lawful heir, if I could see him
once restored to his rights, I should ask no more.'

She soon composed herself, and resumed her disastrous story. Lord
Glendower, incensed by her claim, refused to remit her money. She wrote
to her brother an account of her situation. He answered, that he had
already spent upon her education a sum sufficient, if she had acted
prudently, to have made her fortune; that he was not such a fool as to
spend more in publishing her disgrace in a court of law, where he was
sure no judge would award her five shillings of damages;--that he sent
her thirty pounds to furnish a shop of small wares, and desired he might
never hear of her more. The money came in time to rescue her from a
prison; but the payment of her debts left her penniless. She had
subsisted for some time by the sale of her trinkets and clothes. Lower
and lower her resources had fallen; narrower and more narrow had become
the circle of her comforts, till she was now completely a beggar.

She had also long struggled with ill health. 'This exhausting cough,'
said she, 'and this weakness that makes every thing a burden to me, are
very disheartening, though I know they are not dangerous.' I looked at
her, and shuddered. If ever consumption had set its deadly seal upon any
face, hers bore the impression.

'What is the matter, Ellen?' said she, 'I assure you I am not so ill as
I look.'

'I hope not,' said I, trying to smile.

Evening was now closing; and as I knew that the place which Juliet had
for some days called her home was at a considerable distance, I was
about to propose sharing my apartment with her for the night; when my
landlady opening my door, desired, in a very surly tone, that I would
speak with her. Half guessing the subject of our conference, I followed
her out of hearing of my unfortunate companion. In terms which I must
rather attempt to translate than record, she enquired what right I had
to fill her house with vagrants. With some warmth I resisted the
application of the phrase, telling her that the misfortunes of a
gentlewoman gave no one a right to load her with suspicion or abuse.
'Troth, as for gentility,' said the landlady, 'I believe you are both
much about it. I might have my notion; but I never knew rightly what you
were, till I saw the company you keep. A creature painted to the eyes!'

'Painted! The painting of death!'

'Well, well, painted or not painted, send her out of this house; for
here she shall stay no longer!'

'Mrs Milne,' said I, scorning the altercation in which I was engaged,
'while that apartment is called mine, it shall receive or exclude
whomsoever I please.' I turned from her, determined to use the right
which I had asserted.

'Yours, indeed!' cried the enraged landlady, following me. 'It shall not
be called yours long then. Either pay for the week you have had it, or
else leave it this moment; and don't stay here bringing disgrace upon
creditable people that never bore but a good character till now.'

I am ashamed to own that the insolence of this low woman overcame my
frail temper. 'Disgrace!' I began in the tone of strong indignation; but
recollecting that I could only degrade myself by the contest, I again
turned away in silence.

She now forced herself into my apartment; and, addressing Miss Arnold,
commanded her to leave the house instantly. Miss Arnold cast a
supplicating look upon me. 'I shall never reach home alone,' said she.

'There is no need for your attempting it,' returned I; 'for if you go, I
will accompany you.'

To this proposal, however, Miss Arnold appeared averse. She showed a
strong inclination to remain where she was, and even condescended to
remonstrate with the insolent landlady. Had I guessed the reason of this
condescension, I might have been saved one of the most horrible moments
of my existence. It had no other effect than to increase the
impertinence it was meant to disarm; for the 'soft answer which turns
away wrath' must at least seem disinterested. Disgusted with this scene
of vulgar oppression and spiritless endurance, 'Come, Juliet,' said I,
'if I cannot protect you from insolence here, I will attend you home;
and since you cannot share my apartment, let me take part of yours.'

Miss Arnold still lingered, however, and again made a fruitless appeal
to the compassion of Mrs Milne; but finding her inexorable, she
consented to depart.

I threw my purse upon the table. 'Mrs Milne,' said I, 'after what you
have obliged me to hear, I will not put it in your power to insult me by
farther suspicion. There is the money I owe you.'

The landlady, now somewhat softened, followed us to the door, assuring
me that it was not to me she made objections. I left her without reply;
and giving Juliet my arm, supported her during a long and melancholy
walk.

It was almost dark; and the thoughts of passing unprotected through the
streets of a great city filled me with alarm. I breathed painfully, and
scarcely dared to speak even in a whisper. Every time that my exhausted
companion stopped to gather strength, I shook with the dread that we
should attract observation; and when we proceeded, I shrunk from every
passenger, as if from an assassin. Without molestation, however, we
reached Miss Arnold's abode.

It was in the attic story of a building, of which each floor seemed
inhabited by two separate families; and in this respect alone it seemed
superior to the dwelling of my poor friend Cecil, who shared her
habitation with a whole community. Miss Arnold knocked; and a dirty,
wretched-looking woman cautiously opened the door. Presenting me, Miss
Arnold began, 'I have brought you a lady who wishes to take----' But the
moment the woman perceived us, her eyes flashed fury; and she
interrupted Miss Arnold with a torrent of invective; from which I could
only learn, that my companion, being her debtor, had deceived her as to
her means of payment, and that she was resolved to admit her no more.
Having talked herself out of breath, she shut the door with a violence
which made the house shake.

I turned to the ghastly figure of my companion, and grew sick with
consternation. Half bent to the earth, she was leaning against the
threshold, as if unable to support herself. 'Plead for me, Ellen,' said
she faintly. 'I can go no farther.' In compliance with this piteous
request, I knocked again and again; but no answer was returned.

I now addressed myself to Juliet; entreating her to exert herself, and
assuring her of my persuasion, that if she could once more reach my
lodgings, even the inexorable Mrs Milne would not permit her to pass the
night without a shelter. But the weakness of the disease had extended to
the mind. Miss Arnold sunk upon the ground. 'Oh, I can go no farther!'
she cried; wringing her hands, and weeping like an infant. 'Go--go home,
and leave me, Ellen. I left you in your extremity, and now judgment has
overtaken me! Go, and leave me.'

It was in vain that I entreated her to have mercy on herself, and on her
child; imploring that she would not, by despair, create the evil she
dreaded. 'Oh, I cannot go, I cannot go,' said she; and she continued to
repeat, weeping, the same hopeless reply to all that I could urge to
rouse her.

The expectation which I had tried to awaken in her was but feeble in my
own breast; and I at last desisted from my fruitless importunity. But
what course remained for me? Even the poorest shelter I had not the
means to procure. We were in a land of strangers; and many a heart open
to human sympathies was closed against us. To solicit pity was to
provoke suspicion, perhaps to encounter scorn. I myself might return to
my inhospitable home, but what would then become of the unfortunate
Juliet? While I gazed upon the dying figure before me, and weighed the
horrible alternative of leaving her perhaps to perish alone, or
remaining with her exposed to all from which the nature of woman most
recoils, my spirits failed; and the bitter tears of anguish burst from
my eyes. But there are thoughts of comfort which ever hover near the
soul, like the good spirits that walk the earth unseen. There is a hope
that presses for admission into the heart from which all other hope is
fled. 'Juliet,' said I, 'let us commend ourselves to God. It is His will
that we should this night have no protection but His own. Be the
consequence what it may, I will not leave you.'

My unhappy companion answered only by a continuance of that feeble
wailing which was now more the effect of weakness than of grief; while
I, turning from her, addressed myself to Heaven, with a confidence which
they only know who have none other confidence.




CHAPTER XXVI

    _It is too late. The life of all_ her _blood
    Is touched corruptibly; and_ her _poor brain
    (Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house)
    Doth, by the idle comments which it makes,
    Foretell the ending of mortality._

                                             Shakspeare.


I was startled by the approach of a heavy footstep. Trembling, I
whispered to Miss Arnold an earnest entreaty that she would command
herself, and not invite curiosity, perhaps insult, to our last retreat.
But I asked an impossibility; poor Juliet could not restrain her
sobbing. The step continued to ascend the stair. Though now hopeless of
concealment, I instinctively shrunk aside. But I breathed more freely,
when I perceived through the dusk that the cause of my alarm was a
woman.

Crossing the landing, she knocked at the door adjacent to that which had
been closed against us; then approaching my companion, she enquired into
the cause of her distress. 'She is a stranger, sick, and unfortunate,'
said I, now coming forward. 'The only place where she could this night
find shelter is so distant, that she is quite unable to reach it.'

A youthful voice now calling from within was answered by the woman; and
presently the door was opened by a girl carrying a lamp. Several joyous
faces crowded to welcome a mother's return; and beyond, the light of a
cheerful fire danced on the roof of a clean though humble dwelling. I
turned an eye almost of envy towards the woman. The lamp threw a strong
gleam upon her features; they were familiar to my recollection. She was
the widow of the poor gardener who died in my presence at Greenwich.

She had turned to address some words of compassion to Miss Arnold; when
the little girl pulled her by the apron, and, casting a sidelong look at
me, said in a half whisper, 'Mother, _she_ is like the good English
lady.' The widow turned towards me, and uttered an exclamation of
surprise; then doubting the evidence of her senses, 'No,' said she, 'it
is not possible.'

'It is but too possible, Mrs Campbell,' said I; 'the changes of this
restless world have made me the stranger now.'

'And its yoursel', miss! exclaimed the widow, looking at me with a glad
smile. 'God bless you! ye shall never be strange to me. Please just to
come in, and rest you a little.' Then recollecting Juliet, she added,
'If ye be concerned for this poor body, just bid her come in too.'

The wanderer, who, benighted in the enemy's land, has been welcomed to
the abode of charity and peace, will imagine the gladness with which I
accepted this invitation. I raised my dejected companion from the
ground, led her to her new asylum, and fervently thanked Heaven for the
joyful sense of her safety and my own.

We presently found ourselves in an apartment which served in the double
capacity of kitchen and parlour; and our hostess placing a large stuffed
elbow-chair close to the fire, cordially invited me to sit. She looked
back towards my companion, as if doubtful whether she were entitled to
similar courtesy. 'Lady Glendower,' said I, offering to her the place of
honour. It was the first time I had called Juliet by her new name. After
all my impressive lessons of humility, I fear I was not entirely
disinterested in asserting the disparity between the rank of my
companion and her appearance; but I fancied for the moment, that I was
merely claiming respect and compassion for the unfortunate. I had,
however, some difficulty in conveying the desired impression of my
friend's dignity; and it was not until I had succeeded, that I enquired
whether Mrs Campbell could give her the accommodation which she so much
needed. The good woman seemed delighted to have an opportunity of
serving me; and her little girl, who, with the awkward bashfulness
common to the children of her country, had resisted all the advances of
her old acquaintance, now whispered to her mother an offer to resign her
bed to the stranger. This was, however, unnecessary. Mrs Campbell
informed me, that since I had enabled her to return to her own
connections, she had never known want, having obtained constant
employment as a laundress; that her brother, a thriving tradesman,
having lately become a widower, had invited her to superintend his
family; and his business having for the present carried him from home,
she offered Juliet the use of his apartment.

My companion thus provided with a decent shelter, I began to indulge
some anxiety on my own account. It was near midnight; and I was almost a
mile from home, if I could indeed be said to have a home. I had never
traversed a city by night without all the protections of equipage and
retinue. Now, without defence from outrage, except in the neglect of the
passers by, I was to steal timidly to a threshold where my admission was
at best doubtful. The only alternative was to request that the widow
would extend to me the kindness which she had just shown to my friend;
and this request required an effort which I found almost impracticable.

I hesitated in my choice of evils till the hour almost decided the
question; then half resolved to utter my proposal, I began to speak; but
the favour which I had petitioned for another, I found it impossible to
ask for myself; and I was obliged to conclude my hesitating preface by a
request, that Mrs Campbell would accompany me home.

Juliet no sooner saw me about to depart, than she was seized with the
idea that I was going to forsake her for ever; and reduced by illness
and fatigue to the weakness of infancy, she again began to weep. In vain
did I promise to return in the morning. 'Oh no,' said she, 'I cannot
expect it. I cannot expect you to visit me--me, forlorn and wretched.'

'These very circumstances, Juliet,' said I, 'would of themselves ensure
my return. But if you will not rely on my friendship, at least trust my
word. That you have never had reason to doubt.'

Miss Arnold did not venture to offend me by expressing her suspicions of
a promise so formally given; but when I offered to go, she clung to me,
entreating with an earnestness which betrayed her fears, that I would
not leave her to want and desolation.

Overcome by her tears, or glad perhaps of a pretext for yielding
decently, I now offered to remain with her, and proposed to share her
apartment. Our grateful hostess willingly consented to this arrangement;
and, with a hundred apologies for the poorness of my accommodations,
conducted us to our chamber. She little guessed how sumptuous it was,
compared with others which I had occupied! It was to be sure of no
modern date; it shook at every step; and the dark lining of wainscot
gave it a gloomy appearance; but its size and furniture were handsome,
compared with what I had been accustomed to find in the dwellings of
labour. An excellent bed was rendered luxurious by linens which, in
purity and texture, might have suited a palace; and here I had soon the
satisfaction of seeing my exhausted companion and her infant sink into
profound repose.

For my part, I felt no inclination to sleep. My mind was occupied in
considering the difficulties of my situation. While I had scarcely any
apparent provision for my real wants, I was in a manner called to supply
those of another; for Juliet was even more destitute than myself.
Health, spirits, and activity still remained to me; blessings compared
with which all that I had lost were as nothing; while the disease which
was dragging her to the grave had already left her neither power to
struggle, nor courage to endure. To desert her was an obduracy of
selfishness which never entered my contemplation. But it remained for me
to consider whether I should first provide for my own indispensable
wants, and bestow upon her all else that constant diligence could
supply; or whether we should share in common our scanty support, and
when it failed, endure together.

'Were I to supply her occasionally,' thought I, 'every trifling gift
would be dearly paid by the recollection that she forsook me in my
extremity. If we live together, nothing will remind her that she owes
any thing to me, and in time she may forget it. And shall not I indeed
be the debtor? What shall I not owe her for the occasion to testify my
sense of the great, the overwhelming forgiveness which has been heaped
upon me? O Author of peace and pardon! enable me joyfully to toil, and
to suffer for her, that I may at last trace, in this dark soul, a
dawning of thine own brightness!'

My resolution was taken, and I lost no time in carrying it into effect.
Understanding that our present apartment was to be unoccupied for some
weeks, I hired it upon terms almost suitable to the state of my
finances. I explained to Juliet my situation and my intentions; telling
her gaily, that I appointed her my task-mistress, and expected she would
look well to her duty. I next proposed to go and settle the demands of
my former landlady, and to remove my small possessions to my new abode.
Juliet made no resistance to this proposal; though I could read
suspicion in the eye which scrutinised my face as I spoke. When I was
ready to depart, she suddenly requested me to carry her little boy with
me, under pretence that she herself was unable to give him exercise. I
was instantly sensible of this palpable contrivance to secure my return.
To feel myself suspected of treachery at the very moment when I was
impatient to make every sacrifice, assailed my temper, where, alas! it
has ever been most assailable. 'What right have you to insult me?'--I
indignantly began; but when my eye rested on the faded countenance, the
neglected form, the spiritless air of my once playful companion, my
anger vanished. 'Oh, Juliet!' said I, 'do not add to all your other
distresses the pain of suspecting your friend. Thoughtless, selfish, you
may have found me; but why should you think me treacherous?' Miss Arnold
protested immutable confidence, and unbounded gratitude; but I was no
longer the credulous child of self-conceit and prosperity; and pained
and disgusted, I turned away. Common discretion, however, required that
I should not, by dwelling upon her unworthiness, render the task of
befriending her more burdensome. I had indeed neither time nor spirits
to spare for any disagreeable subject of contemplation.

After settling my accounts with Mrs Milne, I expended the miserable
remainder of my money, partly on indispensable supply for the wants of
the day,--partly on materials for the work which I hoped to earn
subsistence for the morrow. Of these I was obliged to be content with a
very humble assortment. I remembered that, in our better days, Juliet,
as well as myself, had shown inexhaustible ingenuity in the creation of
toys; and I fancied that we might again, with pleasure, share these
light labours together. But no one who has not made the experiment can
imagine how deadly compulsion is to pleasure;--how wearisome the very
sport becomes which must of necessity be continued the livelong
day;--how inviting is every gleam of sunshine, every glimpse of the open
face of Heaven, to one who dares not spare a moment to enjoy them!
Oppressed by the listlessness of disease, Juliet could scarcely make
this experiment; or rather perhaps her early habits could not give way
to a sense of duty, or even of necessity. Her work was taken up and
relinquished a hundred times a day. The trifle which was begun one hour,
was the next deserted for another, to be in its turn forsaken. But what
was worse, a series of efforts defeated,--the sense of a fault which she
had not courage to amend, had an unfortunate effect upon her temper; and
the once playful and caressing Juliet became discontented and peevish.

These humours indeed she seldom directly vented upon me; but her ill
health, her misfortunes, her privations, the treachery of her husband,
the cruelty of her brother, and the ill qualities of mankind in general,
furnished her with sufficient subjects of impatience. Once indeed, for a
moment, her self-command forsook her so far, that she turned her
displeasure on a trifling occasion against me. I kept my temper,
however; and she instantly recovered hers. But the cowardly fear of
alienating me, the most provoking of all her weaknesses, prompted her
soon after to overwhelm me with promises which were to be performed when
she should be restored to her rights and dignities. I had resolved never
to wound her by one severe expression, and even now I kept my purpose,
though I wept with indignation.

But in spite of my forbearance, and Juliet's caution, I was often
sensible that I had involuntarily given her pain. I could see that she
often mistook the most casual expressions for subtle reproach, or
insinuated threat. Though I forgave, I found it impossible to convince
her of my forgiveness. However suppressed, the latent impression of her
mind certainly was, that I must, in some sort, avenge myself for her
former desertion; nor could she always conceal the mingled sentiment of
fear and anger which this impression inspired.

But no expression of impatience, nor even of suspicion, was so
tormenting to me as the abject entreaties for forgiveness, which were
reiterated after the most solemn assurances that they were needless.
'For Heaven's sake, Juliet,' I would say to her, 'let this subject be
dropped for ever. I beseech you to let me forget that I have any thing
to forgive you. If ever you see me fail in kindness, if ever I seem to
prefer my own comfort or advantage to yours, then--then remind me that
you once did me wrong, that you may rouse me by the strongest of motives
to love and benefit you.' But all I could say, did only, at best,
impress her with momentary conviction. More frequently her efforts
failed to conceal from me that she thought me more capable of inventing
Christian sentiments than of feeling them.

In the mean time, her feeble frame declined from day to day; yet, while
she was thus a prey to groundless apprehensions, the melancholy
security, which is so frequent a symptom of her disease, blinded her to
the approach of inevitable fate. It was heart-breaking to see her
spending her last breath in devising schemes of vanity or revenge;
fixing, with suspicious dread, her dying eye upon a fellow-worm,
regardless of all that the Creator could threaten or bestow. Often did I
resolve to awaken her to her danger; but so profound seemed her
security, that my courage was unequal to the task. I did not, indeed,
deceive her with the language of hope, but I forbore, explicitly, to
express my fears; and with this concealment, so cowardly, so unfriendly,
so cruel, I shall never cease to reproach myself.

It was, perhaps, for want of this very act of resolution, that I found
it impossible to rouse her to any serious examination of her own mind,
any alarming impressions of her condition as an accountable creature.
Having once settled it that I had been converted to methodism by Miss
Mortimer, she was as impenetrable to all that I could urge, as if the
name she gave to the speaker could have affected the nature and
importance of the truth spoken.

My desertion was the sole object of her serious fears; her hopes all
centered in her little boy, or rather in the honours which she expected
him to attain. She was constantly urging me to find out some lawyer,
whom the love of justice, or the hope of future recompense, might induce
to undertake her cause. The ruin which her success was to bring upon one
whom I had once regarded as an enemy made me unwilling to take any part
in Miss Arnold's scheme; and my extreme dislike to asking favours
rendered me particularly averse to make the application she desired. At
last, weary of my delays, she herself undertook the business.

As she was no longer able to walk abroad, the earnings of two entire
days were spent in conveying her to and from the chambers of an eminent
lawyer; but we forgot our wants and our toils together, when she
received a written opinion, that her claims were at least tenable.

The exertion she had made was death to the unfortunate Juliet. Her cough
and fever increased to an alarming degree. Her sickly appetite revolted
from our homely meals; and every thing which I had the means to procure
was in turn rejected with loathing. That which at times she fancied
might be less distasteful was no sooner procured, sometimes with
difficulty enough, than it became offensive. The most unremitting
diligence, the most rigid self-denial, could not provide for the
caprices of the distempered palate; while the habits of indulgence,
uniting with the feebleness of disease, rendered even the trivial
disappointments of appetite important to poor Juliet. She would fret
like an infant over the want of that which I had not to give; and would
repeat again and again the wish which she knew could not be gratified. I
cannot boast that my temper was always proof against this chiding.
Sometimes I found safety in flight,--sometimes in the remembrance of
Miss Mortimer's patient suffering,--and in a heartfelt prayer, that my
life and my death might want every other comfort, rather than those
which had to the last supported the spirit of my friend.

To all our other difficulties, a new cause of perplexity was suddenly
added. The toyman who purchased my work one evening informed me, that he
had an overstock of my baubles; and that unless I would greatly lower
their price, he could for the present employ me no more. I was
thunderstruck at this disaster. My earnings were already barely adequate
to our wants, therefore, to reduce my wretched gains, was to incur at
once all the real miseries of poverty. After my former experience in the
difficulty of procuring employment, the loss of my present one seemed
the sentence of ruin; and I, who should once have felt intolerable
hardship in one day of labour, could now foresee no greater misfortune
than idleness.

I wandered home irresolute and disconsolate. I seemed burdened beyond my
strength, and felt the listless patience which succeeds a last vain
struggle. I entered my home with the heavy careless step of one who has
lost hope. My companion had sunk into a slumber; and as I watched her
peaceful insensibility, I almost wished that she might awaken no more.

In such dark hours our departed sins ever return to haunt us. I
remembered the thoughtless profusion with which I had wasted the gifts
of fortune. I remembered that, with respect to every valuable purpose,
they had been bestowed upon me in vain. It was strictly just, that the
trust so abused should be entirely withdrawn; and, forgetful of all my
better prospects, I sunk into the despondence of one who feels the grasp
of inflexible, merciless justice. 'I will struggle with my fate no
more,' said I. 'I have deserved and will endure it patiently.'
Patiently! did I call it? Were my feelings those of one invited in a
course of steady endeavours to hope for a blessing, but forewarned that
this blessing might not wear the form of success? Did they not rather
resemble the sullen resignation of him who is thwarted by a resistless
adversary?

A sentiment like this could not harbour long in a mind accustomed to
dwell upon the proofs of goodness unspeakable,--accustomed to commit its
cares to a Father's wisdom, to expect all its joys from a Father's love.
The hour came, the solemn hour, appointed perhaps to teach us at once
our dependence and our security, when, by the very constitution of our
frame, all mortal being resigns itself into the hands of the Guardian
who slumbereth not;--when all mortal being is forced to commit its
possessions, its powers, to His care, in order to receive them renovated
from His bounty again. I know not how it is with others, but I cannot
help considering the helplessness of sleep as an invitation to cast
myself implicitly upon His protection; nor can I feel the healthful
vivacity of the waking hour, without receiving in it a pledge of His
patience and His love. The morning found me in peace and in hope,
although I was as little as ever able to devise the means of my escape
from penury.

One scheme at last occurred to me, which nothing but dire necessity
could have suggested; and which, in spite of the bitter medicine I had
received, still gave me pain enough to indicate the original disease of
my mind. This scheme was, to request that our landlady would endeavour
to dispose of my work among the families by whom she was employed.
Though she must have guessed at my situation, it could only be partially
known to her; for I had always taken care to discharge her claims with
scrupulous punctuality; submitting to many a privation, rather than fail
to lay aside daily the pittance necessary to answer her weekly demand.
To tell her of my wants,--to commit the story of them to her
discretion,--to claim her aid in a traffic which I myself had been
accustomed to consider as only a more modest kind of begging,--was so
revolting to my feelings, that, had my own wants alone been in question,
the effort would never have been made, while they were any thing less
than intolerable. But I did not _dare_ to resist the wants of Juliet,
for Juliet had wronged me. I could not resist them; for a series of
kindnesses, begun in a sense of duty, had awakened in my heart something
of its early affection towards her; and her melancholy decay of body and
of mind touched all that was compassionate in my nature.

Yet I gladly recollected, that Mrs Campbell's absence would afford me
some hours of reprieve; and in the evening, the sound of her return made
my breath come short. Coldly and concisely I made my request, striving
the while for a look of unconcern. The request was cordially granted;
and the good woman proceeded to ask a hundred questions and
instructions; for she had none of that quick observation and instinctive
politeness which would have made my Highland friend instantly perceive
and avoid a painful subject. The only directions, however, which I was
inclined to give her, were to spare my name, and to use no solicitation.
Having prepared some toys, of which the workmanship constituted almost
the sole value, I committed them to her charge.

The first day, she brought back my poor merchandise undiminished; and,
in consequence, I was obliged to let the toyman take it at little more
than the price of the materials. The second, however, she was more
fortunate. She sold a little painted basket for more than the sum I had
expected it to bring; and conveyed to me, besides, a message from the
purchaser, desiring that I would undertake to paint a set of ornaments
for a chimney-piece. My satisfaction was somewhat damped by the lady's
making it a condition of her employing me, that I should receive her
directions in person. There was no room for hesitation, however, and I
was obliged to consent.

Poor Juliet was childishly delighted with out good fortune. 'Now,' cried
she, 'I may have the glass of Burgundy and water that you have been
refusing me these two days.' For two days she had almost entirely
rejected the simple fare which I could offer, though day and night she
ceased not to complain that she was pining for the support which her
languid frame required; and this same glass of Burgundy and water was
constantly declared to be the only endurable form of sustenance, the
panacea which was instantly to cure all her ailments.

'Indeed, Juliet,' said I, 'we must endeavour to think of something else
that you can take. All the money we have, excepting what must be paid
Mrs Campbell to-morrow, would not buy the smallest quantity of Burgundy
that is sold.'

'I am sure Mrs Campbell would wait,' returned Juliet: 'she does not want
the money.'

'But we have no right to make her wait, Juliet. The money is not ours
but hers. Besides, you know, we find it difficult to meet even our
regular expense, so that to recover from debt, would, I am sure, be
impossible.'

'Oh, from such a small debt as that,--but I cannot expect that you
should inconvenience yourself for me. I have not deserved it from you. I
have no right to hope that you should care for my wants or my
sufferings,--only from pity to the poor infant at my breast.'

Juliet shed tears, and continued to weep and to complain, till, unable
to resist, yet determined not to make a concession which I knew by
experience would be as useless as ruinous, I started up and quitted her
without reply. I left her for some time alone, in hopes that she would
recollect the folly of her perseverance, or that her inclination might
wander to something more attainable. But when I again opened the door,
her hand was upon the lock. 'Oh!' cried she, 'I thought you would never
come! Where is it?'

'Dear Juliet,' said I, sickened with her obstinacy, 'you know you ask
impossibilities.'

She had persuaded herself that she had prevailed; and the
disappointment, however trivial, was more than she could bear. She burst
into violent sobs, which by degrees increased into a sort of asthmatic
fit, seeming to threaten immediate dissolution. Fortunately the family
were not yet in bed; and medical assistance, though of the humblest
kind, was almost immediately procured. As soon as the fit was removed,
the apothecary's apprentice, or as Mrs Campbell called him, 'the
doctor,' administered to his patient an opiate, which was so effectual,
that she was still in a quiet sleep when the hour came for visiting my
new employer.

My reluctance to this visit was almost forgotten in the anxiety
occasioned by the situation of poor Juliet. All night as I watched by
her bed-side, I had half doubted the virtue of my resistance to her
wishes, and thought I would sacrifice any thing rather than again
exercise such hazardous fortitude. My blood ran cold at the thought that
I had nearly been in some sort the means of hurrying her to her great
account; an account for which she seemed, alas! so miserably unprepared.
The danger she had just escaped increased the anxiety which I had long
felt to obtain medical advice for her; and seemed to make it a moral
duty that I should no longer trust to my own unskilful management, that
which was so unspeakably important, and so lamentably frail. But the
means of purchasing advice were beyond my reach; and the thought of
procuring it in a manner more suitable to my condition had been often
dismissed as too humbling to bear consideration.

My new employment now offered hopes of obtaining the assistance so much
desired. But the accomplishments of these hopes must of necessity be
distant, while Juliet's situation was no longer such as to admit of
delay. The only way of escaping from this perplexity was one to which I
felt extreme repugnance. This was, to request that the lady for whom I
was to paint the ornaments would advance part of the price of my work.

I know not why I was so averse to make this request. Surely I was not so
silly as to be ashamed of poverty, nor weak enough to feel my
self-estimation lessened by the absence of that which could never be
considered as part of myself, but only of my outward situation!
Besides, whatever disgrace might rest upon a petition for charity, no
shame could reasonably attach to a fair demand upon the price
voluntarily offered for my labour. Though in spite of these, and many
other reasonable considerations, my averseness to this request remained
in full force, I never exactly discovered the grounds of it; because
experience had taught me, that when duty is ascertained to lie on one
side, it is better to omit all consideration of what might be said on
the other. Now, as it was certainly my duty, however painful, to procure
assistance for poor Juliet, it would have been imprudent to pry into the
reasons which might disincline me to the task.

All this, with a hundred anticipations of success and of disappointment,
passed through my mind as I proceeded towards the place of my
destination. I was shown into the presence of an elderly lady of very
prepossessing appearance. The consistent, unaffected gravity of her
dress, air, and demeanour, claimed the respect due to her age, while her
benevolent countenance and gracious manner seemed to offer the
indulgence which youth requires. She received me with more than
courtesy; and entered into conversation with an ease which quickly made
me forget what was embarrassing in my visit. I soon perceived that our
favourable impressions were mutual; and was at no loss to account for
this good fortune on my part, when the lady hinted that she had borrowed
her sentiments from the grateful Mrs Campbell.

It was not until near the close of a long interview that she contrived,
with a delicacy which spared the jealous sensibility of dependence, to
give directions for the work which she expected me to do; and to make me
understand that she would willingly proportion the recompense to the
labour bestowed. But the more her politeness invited me to respect
myself, the more painful became the thought of sinking at once from an
equal to a suppliant; and as the moment approached when the effort must
be made, my spirits forsook me. I became absent and embarrassed. I
hesitated; and half persuaded myself, that I had no right to tax the
kindness of a stranger. Then I remembered Juliet's extreme danger, the
scene which was still before my eyes, her frightful struggles for
breath, the deadly exhaustion which followed; and it seemed as if my
humiliation would scarcely cost me an effort. 'There is a favour,'--I
began; but when I met the enquiring eye, I hastily withdrew mine; the
scorching blood rushed to my cheeks; and I stood abashed and silent.

'You were going to say something,' said the lady. I stammered I know
not what. She took my hand with the kind familiarity of a friend. 'I
wish,' said she, in a voice of gentle solicitude, 'that I could make you
forget the shortness of our acquaintance. It is hard that you should
think of me as a stranger, while I feel as if I had known you from your
cradle.'

The voice of kindness has ever found instant access to my heart; yet it
was not gratitude alone which filled my eyes with tears as I uttered my
confused reply. 'Oh, you are good--I see that you are good,' said I;
'and I know I ought not to feel--I ought not to give way to--but not
even extreme necessity could have----'

I stopped; but the lady's purse was already in her hand. 'If I dared,'
said she, 'I could chide you well; for I fear you are one of those who
will scarcely accept the bounty of Providence if He administer it by any
hand but his own. Try to receive this trifle as if it came directly from
Himself.'

I now quickly recovered my powers of speech, while I assured the lady
that she had mistaken my meaning, and explained to her the favour which
I had really intended to ask. Then, recollecting the justice of her
reproof, 'Yes, chide me as you will,' said I; 'I have not deserved so
gentle a monitor. I deserve to be severely reminded of the humility with
which every gift of Heaven ought to be received by one who has so often
forfeited them all.'

The lady, who seemed perfectly to understand the character with which
she had to do, now frankly bestowed the assistance asked, and delicately
offered no more. As I was taking my leave, she enquired my address;
adding, that she believed Mrs Campbell had neglected to mention my name.
Again I felt my face glow; but I had seen my error, and would not
persist in it. 'No, madam,' said I, 'a blamable weakness made me
desirous to conceal my name; but you are not one of those who will think
the worse of Ellen Percy because she contributes to her own support.'

'Percy!' repeated the lady, as if struck with some sudden recollection.
'But I think Mrs Campbell mentioned that you had no connections in
Scotland.'

'None, madam; scarcely even an acquaintance.'

'Then,' said the lady, 'it must be another person for whom my friend is
enquiring so assiduously.'

I would fain have asked who this friend was; but the lady did not
explain herself, and I was obliged to depart without gratifying my
curiosity. That curiosity, however, presently gave way to stronger
interests. It was now in my power to obtain a real benefit for poor
Juliet. As for the morbid inclination which had cost her so dear, I
found it fixed upon a new trifle, which was soon procured, and as soon
rejected. But I could now obtain medical advice for her, and I did not
delay to use the advantage; though she was herself so insensible to her
danger that she was with difficulty brought to consent that a physician
should be called. Recollecting the person to whom I owed my escape from
the most horrible of confinements, and naturally preferring his
attendance to that of a stranger, I sent to request his presence; and he
immediately obeyed the summons.

I watched his countenance and manner as he interrogated his poor
patient, and could easily perceive that he judged the case hopeless;
while she evidently tried to mislead him, as she had deceived herself,
retracting or qualifying the statement of every symptom which he
appeared to think unfavourable. At the close of his visit, I quitted the
room with him. He had written no prescription; and I enquired whether he
had no directions to give. 'None,' said he, hastening to be gone,
'except to let her do as she pleases.' I offered him the customary fee.
'No, no, child,' said he; 'it is needless to throw away both my time and
your money; either of them is enough to lose.'

Strong as had been my conviction of the danger, I was shocked at this
unequivocal opinion. 'Oh, sir!' cried I, 'can nothing be done?'

'Nothing in the world, my dear,' said he, carelessly: 'all the
physicians in Europe could not keep her alive a week.'

Our melancholy dialogue was interrupted by a noise as of somebody
falling to the ground. I sprung back into the passage, and found Juliet
lying senseless on the floor. Some apprehension excited by Dr ----'s
manner had induced her to steal from her apartment, and listen to our
conversation. The intelligence thus obtained she had not fortitude to
bear. She recovered from her insensibility, only to give way to the most
pitiable anguish. She wept aloud, and wrung her wasted hands in agony.
'Oh, I shall die! I shall die!' she cried; and she continued to repeat
this mournful cry, as if all the energies of her mind could furnish only
one frightful thought. In vain did I attempt to console her; in vain
endeavour to lead towards a better world the hope which was driven from
its rest below. To all sights and sounds she was already dead. At last
exhausted nature could struggle with its burden no more; and the cries
of despair, and the sobs of weakness, sunk by degrees into the moanings
of an unquiet slumber.




CHAPTER XXVII

    _A chieftain's daughter seemed the maid._
       *       *       *       *       *
    _And seldom o'er a breast so fair
    Mantled a plaid with modest care;
    And never brooch the folds confined
    Above a heart more good and kind._

                                             Walter Scott.


In the morning, when I opened my eyes, Juliet was so peacefully still,
that I listened doubtfully for her breathing; and felt myself relieved
by the certainly that she was alive. I was astonished to find that she
was awake, though so composed; and was wondering at this unaccountable
change, when she suddenly asked me whether Dr ---- was reckoned a man of
any skill in his profession? 'for,' said she, 'he seemed to know nothing
at all of my disorder, except what he learnt from myself; so most likely
he mistakes it altogether.' Shocked to see her thus obstinately cling to
the broken reed, yet wanting courage to wrest it from her hold, I
entreated her to consider that it would not add to the justice of Dr
----'s fears, if she should act as though they were well founded; nor
shorten her life, if she should hasten to accomplish whatever she would
wish to perform ere its close. She was silent for a little; then, with a
deep sigh, 'You are right,' said she. 'Sit down, and I will dictate a
letter, which you shall write, to my brother.'

I obeyed; and she began to dictate with wonderful precision a letter, in
which she detailed the opinion of her counsel; named the persons who
could evidence her claims; and dexterously appealed to the ruling
passion of Mr Arnold, by reminding him, that if he could establish the
legitimacy of his nephew, he must, in case of Lord Glendower's death,
become the natural guardian of a youth possessed of five-and-twenty
thousand pounds a year. Who could observe without a sigh, that, while
with a sort of instinctive tact she addressed herself to the faults of
others, she remained in melancholy blindness to her own; and that the
transient strength which the morning restored to her mind, could not
reach her more than childish improvidence in regard to her most
important concerns? But her powers were soon exhausted; before the
letter was finished, her thoughts wandered, and she lay for some hours
as if in a sort of waking dream.

How little do they know of a death-bed who have seen it only in the
graceful pictures of fiction! How little do they guess the ghastly
horrors of sudden dissolution, the humiliating weakness of slow decay!
Paint them even from the life, and much remains to tell which no
spectator can record, much which no language can unfold. 'Oh, who that
could see thee thus,' thought I, as I looked upon the languid,
inexpressive countenance of the once playful Juliet,--'who that could
see thee thus, would defer to an hour like this, the hard task of
learning to die with decency?'

I was sitting by the bed-side of my companion, supporting with one hand
her poor deserted baby, and making with the other an awkward attempt to
sketch designs for the ornaments which I had undertaken to paint, when
the door was gently opened; and the lady for whom I was employed
entered, followed by another, whose appearance instantly fixed my
attention. Her stature was majestic; her figure of exquisite proportion.
Her complexion, though brunette, was admirably transparent; and her
colour, though perhaps too florid for a sentimental eye, glowed with the
finest tints of health. Her black eyebrows, straight but flexible,
approached close to a pair of eyes so dark and sparkling, that their
colour was undistinguishable. No simile in oriental poetry could
exaggerate the regularity and whiteness of her teeth; nor painter's
dream of Euphrosyne exceed the arch vivacity of her smile. Perhaps a
critic might have said that her figure was too large, and too angular
for feminine beauty; that it was finely, but not delicately formed. Even
I could have wished the cheek-bones depressed, the contour somewhat
rounded, and the lines made more soft and flowing. But Charlotte Graham
had none of that ostentation of beauty which provokes the gazer to
criticise.

Her face, though too handsome to be a common one, struck me at first
sight as one not foreign to my acquaintance. When her companion named
her, I recollected my friend Cecil; and there certainly was a family
likeness between these relations, although the latter was a short
square-built personage, with no great pretensions to beauty. The
expressions of the two countenances were more dissimilar than the
features. Cecil's was grave, penetrating, and, considering her age and
sex, severe; Miss Graham's was arch, frank, and animated. Yet there was
in the eye of both a keen sagacity, which seemed accustomed to look
beyond the words of the speaker to his motive.

The deep mourning which Miss Graham wore accounted to me for the cast of
sorrow which often crossed a face formed by nature to far different
expression. Her manners had sufficient freedom to banish restraint, and
sufficient polish to make that freedom graceful; yet for me they
possessed an interesting originality. They were polite, but not
fashionable; they were courtly, but not artificial. They were perfectly
affable, and as free from arrogance as those of a doubting lover; yet in
her mien, in her gait, in every motion, in every word, Miss Graham
showed the unsubdued majesty of one who had never felt the presence of a
superior; of one much accustomed to grant, but not to solicit
indulgence.

Such were the impressions which I had received, almost as soon as Miss
Graham's companion, with a polite apology for their intrusion, had
introduced her to me by name. I was able to make the necessary
compliment without any breach of sincerity; for feebler attractions
would have interested me in the person with whom Cecil had already made
me so well acquainted. But when Miss Graham spoke, her voice alone must
have won any hearer.

'If Miss Percy excuses us,' said she in tones, which, in spite of the
lively imperative accents of her country, were sweetness itself, 'my
conscience will be quite at rest, for I am persuaded it is with her that
my business lies. No two persons could answer the description.'

'You may remember,' said her companion, smiling at my surprised and
inquisitive look, 'I yesterday mentioned a friend who was in search of a
young lady of your name. We are now in hopes that her search ends in
you; and this must be our apology for a great many impertinent
questions.'

'Oh no,' said Miss Graham, 'one will be sufficient. Suffer me only to
ask who were your parents.'

I answered the question readily and distinctly. 'Then,' said Miss
Graham, with a smile, which at once made its passage to my heart, 'I
have the happiness to bring you a pleasant little surprise. My brother
has been so fortunate as to recover a debt due to Mr Percy. He has
transmitted it hither; and Sir William Forbes will honour your draft for
1500_l._'

There are persons who will scarcely believe that I at first heard this
intelligence with little joy. 'Alas!' thought I, looking at poor Juliet,
'it has come too late.' But recollecting that I was not the less
indebted to the kindness of my benefactors, I turned to Miss Graham, and
offered, as I could, my warm acknowledgments. Miss Graham assured me,
with looks which evinced sincerity, that she was already more than
repaid for the service she had rendered me; and prevented further
thanks, by proceeding in her explanation.

'My brother,' said she, 'traced you to the house of a Miss Mortimer and
from thence to Edinburgh; but here he lost you; and being himself at a
distance, he commissioned me to search for you. I received some
assistance from a very grateful _protegée_ of yours and mine, whom I
dare say you recollect by the name of Cecil Graham. She directed me to
the Boswells; but they pretended to know nothing of you: so I came to
town a few days ago, very much at a loss how to proceed, though
determined not to see Glen Eredine again till I found you.'

'And is it possible,' exclaimed I, 'that I have indeed excited such
generous interest in strangers?'

'Call me stranger, if you will,' said Miss Graham, 'provided you allow
that the name gives me a right to a kind reception. But do you include
my brother under that title? I am sure the description he has given of
you shows that he is, at least, well acquainted with your appearance.'

'The dimple and the black eyelashes tally exactly,' said her companion.
'And I could swear to the smile,' returned Miss Graham. 'Nevertheless,'
said I, 'it is only from the praises of his admirer, Cecil, that I know
Mr Kenneth Graham, to whom I presume I am so much indebted.'

The playful smile, the bright hues of health, vanished from Charlotte's
face; and her eyes filled with tears, 'No,' said she, 'it is not to----'
She paused, as if to utter the name had been an effort beyond her
fortitude. 'It is Mr Henry Graham,' said her companion, as if to spare
her the pain of explanation, 'who has been so fortunate as to do you
this service.'

I know not exactly why, but my heart beat quicker at this intelligence.
I had listened so often to Cecil's prophecies, and omens, and good
wishes, that I believe I felt a foolish kind of consciousness at the
name of this Henry Graham, and the mention of my obligation to him.

'Have you no recollection then of ever having met with Henry?' enquired
Miss Graham, recovering herself.

I rubbed my forehead and did my very utmost; but was obliged to confess
that it was all in vain. The rich Miss Percy had been so accustomed to
crowds of attending beaux, that my eye might have been familiar with his
appearance, while his name was unknown to me.

'Well,' said Miss Graham, 'I can vouch for the possibility of
remembering you for ever after a very transient interview; and when you
know Henry better, I dare say you will not forget him.'

We now talked of our mutual acquaintance, Cecil; which led Miss Graham
to comment upon the peculiar manners of her countrymen, and upon the
contrast which they offered to those of the Lowland Scotch. Though her
conversation upon this, and other subjects, betrayed no marks of
extraordinary culture, it discovered a native sagacity, a quickness and
accuracy of observation, which I have seldom found surpassed. Her visit
was over before I guessed that it had lasted nearly two hours; and so
great were her attractions, so delightful seemed the long untasted
pleasures of equal and friendly converse, that I thought less of the
unexpected news which she had brought me, than of the hour which she
fixed for her return.

My thoughts, indeed, no sooner turned towards my newly acquired riches,
than I perceived that they could not, with any shadow of justice, be
called mine; and that they in truth belonged to those who had suffered
by the misfortunes of my father. I therefore resolved to forget that the
money was within my reach; and to labour as I should have done, had no
kind friend intended my relief. Still this did not lessen my sense of
obligation; and gratitude enlivened the curiosity which often turned my
speculations towards Henry Graham. Once as I kept my solitary watch over
Juliet's heavy unrefreshing slumbers, I thought I recollected hearing
her, and some of our mutual acquaintance, descant upon the graces of an
Adonis, who, for one night, had shone the meteor of the fashionable
hemisphere, and then been seen no more. I had been present at his
appearance, but too much occupied with Lord Frederick to observe the
wonder. I afterwards endeavoured to make Juliet assist my recollection;
but her memory no longer served even for much more important affairs;
and all my efforts ended at last in retouching the pictures which I had
accustomed myself to embody of this same Henry Graham. I imaged him with
more than his sister's dignity of form and gesture,--with all her
regularity of feature, and somewhat of her national squareness of
contour;--with all the vivacity and intelligence of her countenance,
strengthened into masculine spirit and sagacity;--with the eye which
Cecil had described, as able to quell even the sallies of frenzy;--with
the smile which his sister could send direct to the heart. At
Charlotte's next visit, I obliged her to describe her brother; and I had
guessed so well, that she only improved my picture, by adding some
minuter strokes to the likeness.

At the same time she removed all my scruples in regard to appropriating
the sum which he had obtained for me, by assuring me, that he had
undertaken the recovery of the debt only upon this express condition,
that half the amount should belong to me; and that to this condition the
creditors had readily consented.

The possession of this little fortune soon became a real blessing; for
Juliet's increasing helplessness loaded my time with a burden which
almost precluded other labour. She was emaciated to a degree which made
stillness and motion alike painful to her; a restless desire of change
seemed the only human feeling which the hand of death had not already
palsied; and a childish sense of her dependence upon me was the sole
wreck of human affection which her decay had spared. Even the fear of
death subsided into the listless acquiescence of necessity. Yet no
nobler solicitudes seemed to replace the waning interests of this life.
Feeble as it was, her mind yet retained the inexplicable power to
exclude thoughts of overwhelming force.

I had seen the inanity of her life; I had alas! shared in her mad
neglect of all the serious duties, of all the best hopes of man; and I
did not dare to see her die in this portentous lethargy of soul. At
every short revival of her strength, or transient clearness of her
intellect, I spoke to her of all which I most desired to impress upon
her mind. At first she answered me by tears and complainings, then by a
listless silence; nor did better success attend the efforts of persons
more skilled in rousing the sleeping conscience. The eloquence of friend
and pastor was alike unavailing to extort one tear of genuine penitence;
for the energy was wanting, without which a prophet might have smitten
the rock in vain.

I must have been more or less than human, could my spirits have resisted
the influence of a scene so dreary as a death-chamber without hope; yet
when I saw my companion sinking to an untimely grave, closing a life
without honour in a death without consolation; when I remembered that we
had begun our career of folly together,--that, from equal wanderings, I
had alone been restored,--from equal shipwrecks, I had alone escaped,--I
felt that I had reason to mingle strong gratitude for what I was, with
deep humiliation for what I might have been!

It was not that I became sensible of the treasure which I had found in
Charlotte Graham. Taught by experience, I had at first yielded with
caution to the attraction of her manners; and often (though in her
absence only I must own) remembered with a sigh how many other qualities
must conspire to fit the companion for the friend. But now, when she
daily forsook admiration, and gaiety, and elegance, to share with me the
cares of a sick-chamber, I daily felt the benefits of her piety,
discretion, and sweetness of temper; and a friendship began, which, I
trust, will outlast our lives.

Although she had too much of the politeness of good feeling to hint an
expectation that I should forsake my unhappy charge, she constantly
spoke of my visiting Castle Eredine, as of a pleasure which she could
not bear to leave in uncertainty; and she detailed plans for our
employments, for our studies, for our excursions among her native hills,
with a minuteness which showed how much the subject occupied her mind.
All her plans bore a constant reference to Glen Eredine. They were
incapable of completion elsewhere. My lessons on the harp were to be
given under the rock of echoes,--in a certain cave she was to teach me
the songs of Selma,--we were to climb Benarde together,--from
Dorch'thalla we were to sketch the lake beyond, with all its mountain
shadows on its breast; while the rocks, which a nameless torrent had
severed from the cliff, and the roots which, with emblematic constancy,
had still clung to them in their fall, were to furnish fore-grounds
unequalled in the tameness of Lowland scenery.

To all the objects round her native vale, Charlotte's imagination seemed
to lend a kind of vitality. She loved them as I should have loved an
animated being; and the more characteristic, or, as I should then have
expressed it, the more savage they were, the stronger seemed their hold
on her affection. I like a little innocent prejudice, so long as it does
not thwart my own. I verily believe, that Charlotte would have thought
Glen Eredine insulted by a comparison to the vale of Tempe. She often
spoke with enthusiastic respect of her father, whom she had left at
Castle Eredine; and with so much solicitude of the blank which her
absence would occasion to him, that I could not help wondering why she
delayed her return. She never mentioned any business that might detain
her; and amusement could not be her bribe, for her time was chiefly
spent in my melancholy dwelling.

Our cheerless task, however, at length was closed. By a change scarcely
perceptible to us, Juliet passed from the lethargy of exhausted life to
deeper and more solemn repose. I felt the intermitting pulse,--I watched
the failing breath; yet so gradual and so complete was her decay, that I
knew not the moment of her departure. All suffering she was spared; for
suffering would, to human apprehension, have been useless to her. I did
not commit her remains to the cares of a stranger. The hand of a friend
composed her for her last repose; the tears of a friend dropped upon her
clay; but they were not the tears of sorrow. Poor Juliet! Less ingenuity
than that which led thee through a degraded life to an unlamented grave
would have procured for thee the best which this world has to give, an
unmolested passage to a better.

Two days after her death, I received from her brother a promise of
protection to the heir of Lord Glendower, and permission, in case of
that event, to send the boy to his uncle, together with the pledges of
legitimacy, which constituted his sole hold upon the justice or
compassion of Mr Arnold. Fortunately for the poor infant, the question
upon which depended the tender cares of his uncle was decided in his
favour. Juliet's marriage was sanctioned; and though her death left Lord
Glendower at liberty to repair, in some sort, the injury which he had
done to Lady Maria, the rights of his first-born son could not be
transferred to the children of his more regular marriage.

When my cares were no longer necessary to my ill-fated companion, I
yielded to the kind persuasions of Miss Graham; and suffered her to
introduce me to whatever was most worthy of observation in a city which
I had as yet so imperfectly seen. Our mornings were generally spent in
examining the town or its environs; our evenings in a kind of society
which I had till now known only in detached specimens; a society in
which there was every thing to delight, though nothing to
astonish,--much good manners, and therefore little singularity,--general
information, and therefore little pedantry,--much good taste, and
therefore little notoriety. I could no longer complain that the ladies
were inaccessible. Introduced by Miss Graham, I was every where received
with more than courtesy; and I, who a few weeks before could scarcely
obtain permission to earn a humble subsistence, was now overwhelmed with
a hospitality which scarcely left me the command of an hour.

And now I was again assailed by the temptation which had formerly
triumphed unresisted. There is no place on earth where beauty is more
surely made dangerous to its possessor; and Charlotte and I could
scarcely have attracted more attention, had we appeared mounted upon
elephants. But I had lost my taste for admiration. I disliked the
constant watchfulness which it imposed upon me; and its pleasures poorly
compensated the pain of upbraiding myself the next moment with my folly
in being so pleased. As to open compliment, it cost me an effort to
answer it with good humour. 'The man suspects that I am vain,' thought
I, as often as I was so addressed; and the suspicion was too near truth
to be forgiven. The only real satisfaction which I derived from the
preposterous homage paid to me, arose from the new light in which it
displayed the generous nature of Charlotte Graham. Yes; trifles serve to
display a great mind; and there was true generosity in the graceful
willingness with which Charlotte, at a time of life when the
precariousness of attentions begin to give them value, withdrew from
competition with a rival inferior to her in every charm which is not
affected by seven years difference of age.

Upon the whole, nothing could be more agreeably amusing, than my
residence in Edinburgh; and the contrast of my late confinement
heightened pleasure to delight. From the time of Lady Glendower's death,
it had been settled that I was to accompany Charlotte to Glen Eredine;
but I must own that I felt no inclination to hasten our departure.
Without once uttering a word, which could place the delay to my account,
Miss Graham deferred our departure from day to day. Yet some involuntary
look or expression constantly betrayed to me, that her heart was in Glen
Eredine.

'Ah, that very sun is setting behind Benarde!' said she with a sigh, one
evening when, from a promenade such as no other city can present, we
were contemplating a gorgeous sunset.

'One would imagine by that sigh, Charlotte,' said I smiling, 'that you
and some dear friend not far from Benarde had made an appointment to
watch the setting sun together.'

'There's a flight!' cried she laughing. 'No am I sure, that such a fancy
would never have entered your mind, if you had not been in love. Come;
look me in the face, and let me catechise you.'

'Not guilty, upon my honour.'

'Humph! This does look very like a face of innocence, I confess. But
stay till you know Henry. Let me see how you will stand examination
then.'

'Just as I do now, I promise you. I ought to have been in love long ago,
if the thing had been possible.'

'Ought? Pray what might impose the duty upon you?'

'The regard of one of the best and wisest of mankind, Charlotte. It was
once my fate to draw the attention of your countryman,--the generous,
the eloquent Mr Maitland.'

I saw Miss Graham start; but she remained silent. 'You must have heard
of him?' continued I; but at that moment, casting my eyes upon
Charlotte, I saw her blush painfully. 'You know him then,' said I.

'Yes I--I do,' answered she hesitatingly; and walked on, in a profound
reverie.

A long silence followed; for Charlotte's blushes and abstraction had
told me a tale in which I could not be uninterested. I perceived that
her acquaintance with Maitland, however slight, had been sufficient to
fix her affections on a spirit so congenial to her own. 'Well, well,'
thought I, 'they will meet one day or other; and he will find out that
she likes him, and the discovery will cost him trouble enough to make it
worth something. She will devote herself willingly to love and solitude,
which is just what he wishes, and I dare say they will be very happy.
Men can be happy with any body. And yet Maitland hates beauties; and
Miss Graham certainly is a beauty.' However, when I threw a glance upon
Charlotte, I thought I had never seen her look so little handsome; for
it must be confessed that the lover must be more than indifferent, whom
his old mistress can willingly resign to a new one.

I soon, however, began to reproach myself with the uneasiness to which I
was subjecting the generous friend to whom I owed such varied forms of
kindness. But the difficulty was, how I should return to the subject
which we had quitted; for, in spite of the frankness of Charlotte's
manners, my freedom with her had limits which were impassable. When she
had once indicated the point upon which she would not be touched, I
dared not even to approach it. The silence, therefore, continued till
she interrupted it by saying, 'You are offended with me, Ellen, and you
have reason to be so; for I put a question which no friend has a right
to ask.'

'Dear Charlotte,' returned I, 'surely you have a right to expect from me
any confidence that you will accept; and I shall most readily----'

'No,' interrupted Miss Graham, 'such questions as mine ought neither to
be asked nor answered. If an attachment is fortunate, it is to be
supposed that the event will soon publish it; if not, the confession is
a degradation to which no human being has a right to subject another.'

'Well,' thought I, 'this is very intelligible, and I shall take care not
to trespass. But I will not keep thy generous heart in pain. Cost what
it will, thou shalt know that thou hast nothing to fear from me.' It was
more easy to resolve than to execute; and I felt my cheek glow with
blushes, more, I fear, of pride than modesty, while I struggled to
relieve the anxiety of my friend. 'Nay, Charlotte,' said I, 'you must
listen to a confession, which is humbling enough, though not exactly of
the kind you allude to. I must do Mr Maitland the justice to say, that
he never put it in my power to reject him. He saw that I was no fit wife
for him; and, at the very moment of confessing his weakness, he
renounced it for ever. Do not look incredulous. It is not a pretty face,
nor even the noble fortune I then expected, that could bribe Maitland to
marry a heartless, unprincipled ----. Thanks be to Heaven that I am
changed--greatly changed. But I assure you, Charlotte, I have not now
the slightest reason to believe myself any bar to your--to Mr Maitland's
happiness with some--some--with somebody who has not my unlucky
incapacity for being in love.'

To this confession, Miss Graham answered only by affectionately pressing
my hand; and then escaped from the subject, by turning from me to speak
to a passing acquaintance. From that time Charlotte, though in other
points perfectly confiding, spoke no more of Maitland; and I must own,
that my respect for her was increased by her reserve upon a topic
prohibited alike by delicacy and discretion. We had indeed no need of
boarding-school confidences to enliven our intercourse. Each eager for
improvement and for information, we had been so differently educated,
that each had much to communicate and to learn. Our views of common
subjects were different enough to keep conversation from stagnating;
while our accordance upon more important points formed a lasting bond
of union. Whoever understands the delights of a kitten and a cork, may
imagine that I was at times no bad companion: and Charlotte was
peculiarly fitted for a friend; for she had sound principles,
unconquerable sweetness of temper, sleepless discretion, and a
politeness which followed her into the homeliest scenes of domestic
privacy.

How often, as her character unfolded itself, did I wonder what strange
fatality had forbidden Maitland to return the affection of a woman so
formed to satisfy his fastidious judgment. But I was forced to wonder in
silence. Charlotte, open as day on every other theme, was here as
impenetrable, as unapproachable, as virgin dignity could make her.
Notwithstanding the recency of our friendship, it was already strong
enough to render every other interest mutual; and Charlotte easily drew
from me the little story of my life and sentiments, while I listened
with insatiable curiosity, to the accounts she gave me of her home, of
her family, and, above all, of her brother Henry.

This was a theme in which she seemed very willing to indulge me. She
spoke of him frequently; and the passages which she read to me from his
letters often made me remember with a sigh that I had no brother. He
seemed to address her as a friend, as an equal; and yet with the
tenderness which difference of sex imposes upon a man of right feeling.
She was his almoner. Through her he transmitted many a humble comfort to
his native valley; and though he had been so many years an alien, he was
astonishingly minute and skilful in the direction of his benevolence. He
appeared to be acquainted with the character and situation of an
incredible number of his clansmen; and the interest and authority with
which he wrote of them seemed little less than patriarchal. Though I
must own that his commands were not always consonant to English ideas of
liberty, they seemed uniformly dictated by the spirit of disinterested
justice and humanity; and Graham, in exercising almost the control of an
absolute prince, was guided by the feelings of a father.

Though Glen Eredine seemed the passion of his soul,--though every letter
was full of the concerns of his clansmen,--there was nothing theatrical
in his plans for their interest or improvement. They were minute and
practicable, rather than magnificent. No whole communities were to be
hurried into civilisation, nor districts depopulated by way of
improvement; but some encouragement was to be given to the schoolmaster;
Bibles were to be distributed to his best scholars; or Henry would
account to his father for the rent of a tenant, who, with his own hands,
had reclaimed a field from rock and broom; or, at his expense, the new
cottages were to be plastered, and furnished with doors and sashed
windows. The execution of these humble plans was, for the present,
committed to Charlotte; and the details which she gave me concerning
them described a mode of life so oddly compounded of refinement and
simplicity, that curiosity somewhat balanced my regret in leaving
Edinburgh.

On a fine morning in September we began our journey; and though I was
accompanied by all on earth I had to love, and though I was leaving what
had been to me the scene of severe suffering, I could not help looking
back with watery eyes upon a place which perhaps no traveller, uncertain
of return, ever quitted without a sigh.




CHAPTER XXVIII

    _----Every good his native wilds impart
    Imprints the patriot passion on his heart;
    And even those hills that round his mansion rise
    Enhance the bliss his scanty fund supplies.
    Dear is that shed to which his soul conforms;
    And dear that hill which lifts him to the storms.
    And as a babe, when scaring sounds molest,
    Clings close and closer to the mother's breast,
    So the loud torrent, and the whirlwind's roar,
    But bind him to his native mountains more._

                                             Goldsmith.


During our first day's journey, the road lay through a country so rich
and so level, that but for the deep indenting of the horizon, I could
have fancied myself in England. 'That would be thought a fine park even
in my country,' said I, as we were passing a princely place. 'Ah, stay
till you see the parks of Eredine!' said Charlotte. It is not to be
told what superb conceptions I formed of these same parks of Eredine;
for my companion did not enter on the description. I thought Blenheim
was to be a paddock compared with them!

Towards evening, the mountains which had once seemed as soft in the
distance as the clouds which rested on them, began to be marked by the
grey lights on the rock, and the deep shadows of the ravine. The morning
brought a complete change of scene. Corn fields and massive foliage had
given place to dull heath, varied only by streaks of verdure, which
betrayed a sheep-track or the path of a nameless rill; while here and
there, a solitary birch 'shivered in silvery brightness.' The hill,
climbed long and painfully, rewarded us with no change of prospect; and
the short descent was immediately succeeded by a more tedious climb.

At last, in a narrow valley, which by contrast looked rich and inviting,
we beheld traces of human habitation; and the change of garb, of
countenance, and of accommodation, announced that we were now, as
Charlotte said, in her 'unconquered country.'--'The Roman,' said she,
'when he had bowed "the sons of little men" to the dust, was forced to
shrink behind his ramparts from the valour of _our_ fathers.'

I own that I was somewhat confused between my own perceptions and the
enthusiasm of my companion. Her eyes flashing through tears of joy, she
shook me triumphantly by the hand. 'You are welcome to the Highlands!'
cried she; 'to the land where never friend found a traitor, nor enemy a
coward!'

In spite of this burst of _amor partiæ_, we were still almost a day's
journey from Charlotte's native place. The mountains had become more
precipitous, and the valleys more clothed, when my companion pointed out
the spot where we were to dine; and intimated, that we must there
exchange our carriage for a mode of conveyance better suited to the way
which lay before us.

The exterior of our inn was certainly none of the most inviting. The
walls, composed of turf and loose stones, were too low to prevent me
from plucking the hare-bells which grew on the top of them; and the
thatch, varied with every hue of moss and lichen, was more to be admired
for picturesque effect, than for any more useful quality of a roof. The
chimney-crag seemed composed of the wreck of what had once been a tub;
the hoops of which, having yielded to the influence of time and the
seasons, were rather imperfectly supplied by bands of twisted heath. The
hut was, however, distinguished from its fellow hovels, by a sashed
window on one side of the door, a most incondite picture of a bottle and
glass on the other, and a stone lintel, bearing, in characters of no
modern shape, the following inscription:--

    16..W.M.T.  Pilgrims we be ilk ane, M.M.B...07.
                That passen and are gane;
                Then here sall pilgrim be
                Welcom'd wi' courtesie.

Before we could draw up to the door of this superb hotel, it poured
forth a swarm of children, more numerous than I could have thought it
possible for such a place to contain. I was prepared to expect the
savage nakedness of legs and feet, which was universal among these
little barbarians. For the rest, their attire was rather ludicrous than
mean. The boys, even though still in their infancy, were helmed in the
martial bonnet of their countrymen; and their short tartan petticoats
were appended to a certain scarlet or blue _juste au corps_, laced up
the back, as if to prevent these children of nature from asserting a
primeval contempt of clothing. With the girls, however, this point
seemed intrusted to feminine sense of propriety; for their upper garment
consisted either of a loose jacket, or a square piece of woollen cloth
thrown round the shoulders, and fastened under the chin only by a huge
brass pin, or a wooden skewer. The absurdity of their appearance was
heightened by the premature gravity of their countenances; which were
more like the grim-visaged babes in an old family picture, than the
animation of youthful life. In profound silence they stood courtesying
as we passed; while the boys remained cap in hand till we entered the
hut.

It consisted of two apartments; one of which I dimly discerned through
the smoke to be occupied by a group of peasants, collected round some
embers which lay in the middle of the floor. Into the other, which was
the state-chamber, Miss Graham and I made our way. It appeared to have
been hastily cleared for our reception; for the earthen floor, as well
as an oaken table, which stood in the middle of it, was covered with
_debris_ of cheese, oat-cakes, and raw onions, intermixed with slops of
whisky. The good woman, however, who was doing the honours, rectified
the disorder seemingly to her own satisfaction, by taking up the corner
of her apron, and sweeping the rubbish from the table to the floor.
Meanwhile she entered into a conversation with Miss Graham, in which
every possible question was directly or indirectly asked, except the
only one which on such occasions I was accustomed to hear, namely, what
we chose to have for dinner. But as it proved, this question would have
been the most unnecessary of all; for, upon enquiry, we learnt that our
choice was limited to a fowl, or, as the landlady termed it, 'a hen.'

While this point was settling, the head waiter and chamber-maid appeared
in the person of a square built wench, naked up to the middle of a
scarlet leg, and without any head-dress except a bandeau of blue worsted
tape. Having tossed a lapfull of brushwood into the chimney (for the
state-chamber had a chimney), she next brought, upon a piece of slate,
some embers which she added to the heap; then squatting herself upon the
hearth, she took hold of her petticoat with both hands at the hem,
tightening it by her elbows; and moving her arms quickly up and down,
she soon fanned the fire into a blaze.

Next came our landlord in the full garb of his country; and great was my
astonishment to see him hold out his hand to Miss Graham as to a
familiar acquaintance. Nor was my surprise at all lessened, when he
coolly took his seat between us, and began to favour us with his
opinions upon continental politics. Provoked by this impertinence, and
by the courtesy with which Miss Graham received it, I interrupted his
remarks, by desiring he would get me a glass of water. Without moving
from his position, he communicated my demand to the maid; and went on
with his conversation. I took the first opportunity of reproving
Charlotte's tame endurance of all this. 'What would you have had me do?'
said she: 'he is a discreet, sensible man, and a gentleman.'

'A gentleman!' repeated I.

'Yes,' returned Charlotte, 'I assure you he is my father's third cousin;
and can count kindred, besides, with the best in Perthshire.'

It was plain that Miss Graham and I affixed somewhat different ideas to
the word 'gentleman;' however, upon the claims of his ancestors, I was
obliged to admit this _gentleman_ to our dinner-table; when, after a
violent commotion among the poultry had announced mortal preparation for
our repast, it at last appeared. Our unhappy 'hen,' whose dying limbs no
civilised hand had composed, was reinforced by a dish of salmon (large
enough to satisfy ten dragoons), which Miss Graham with some difficulty,
persuaded the landlady that the stranger might condescend to taste.

Towards the close of our meal, our attendant pushed aside the panel of a
large wooden bed, which occupied one side of our apartment; and, from a
shelf within, produced a large cheese, and an earthen pitcher full of
butter, which she placed upon the table. Then, from the coverlet, where
they had been arranged to cool, she brought us a large supply of
oat-cakes. I fear I was not polite enough to suppress some natural signs
of loathing; for the girl, with the quick observation of her countrymen,
instantly apologised for the cause of my disgust. 'It is just for sake
of keeping them clean, with your leave,' said she; 'there's so many
soot-drops fall through this house.' In spite of this apology, however,
I was so thoroughly disgusted, that I heard with great joy the trampling
of our horses at the door; and immediately ran out to survey the
cavalcade which had been despatched from Castle Eredine for our
accommodation.

It consisted of three horses of very diminutive size; two of which were
intended to carry Miss Graham and myself, and the third to transport our
baggage. This last was caparisoned somewhat like a gipsy's ass, with two
panniers slung across his back by means of a rope that seemed composed
of his own hair. Into one of these panniers the _gille trushannich_
pushed Miss Graham's portmanteau; and finding that mine was too light to
balance it on the other side, he added a few turfs to make up the
difference. Besides this domestic, we were each provided with a sort of
running footman, whose office it was to keep pace with our horses
and to lead them at any difficult or dangerous step; and our equipage
was completed by six or seven sturdy Highlanders, who, in mere courtesy
to their chieftain's daughter, had walked fifteen or twenty miles to
escort her home.

Thus guarded, we set out; our attendants, seemingly without effort,
keeping pace with the horses. With all of them Miss Graham occasionally
conversed in their native tongue; and I could perceive that they
answered her with perfect readiness and self-possession; but none of
them ever accosted her until he was addressed, nor could she prevail
with any of them to wear his bonnet while she spoke.

Henry's name was so often repeated by them all, that I felt no small
curiosity to learn more minutely the subject of their conversation. But
though I had resumed my Gaelic studies under Charlotte's tuition, I was
not yet sufficiently initiated to follow the utterance of a native; and
my friend had already begun to smile so slily at my questions concerning
her brother, that the very circumstance which awakened my curiosity made
me half afraid to gratify it. At last, looking as unconscious as I
could, I asked Charlotte on what subject her servant was speaking with
such ardour. 'My _friend_ Kenneth,' answered she emphatically, 'is
reminding me of an expedition of Henry's to extricate his nurse's sheep
from the snow. But talk to him yourself; he speaks English.--Kenneth,
poor Miss Percy cannot speak Gaelic; so tell her that story in English.
I know you like to speak a good word for your friend Henry.'--'If he
were here,' said Kenneth, making a gesture of courtesy, which did not
absolutely amount to a bow, 'he would need nobody to speak a good word
for him to a pretty lady.' He then related very minutely how Henry and
he had climbed the rocky side of Benarde; and, from a crag midway in the
precipice, had rescued the whole wealth of a Highland cottager.

'And do you in the Highlands think nothing of risking your lives for a
few sheep?' said I.

'Do you not think, lady,' said Kenneth, 'that I had a good right to risk
my life for my own mother's beasts? And you know the young gentleman was
not to be forbidden by the like of me. His life! I would not have
ventured a hair of his head for all the sheep in Argyll.' Then speaking
to my special attendant, he uttered, with great emphasis, a Gaelic
phrase, which obliged him to translate, signifying, that 'a man's friend
may be dear, but his foster-brother is a piece of his heart.'

'My mother,' continued Kenneth, 'would have lost the _best-beloved lamb
of her fold_, if Mr Henry had not followed me that day; for the frost
had seized me; and I would have laid me down to sleep for a far-off
waking; but Mr Henry drew me, and carried me, and I do not know what he
made of me, but the first sound I heard was my mother crying, "Och chone
a rie, mo cuillean ghaolach." Blessings on his face for her sake! for
had it not been for him, she would have had none but a fremd hand to lay
the sod on her.' Kenneth had obeyed his lady's command; and he now
modestly fell back, as if disclaiming further right to attention.

'Surely Charlotte,' cried I, 'you are the happiest sister in the world.
How deep, how indelible, are the attachments which your brother seems to
awaken! Though he has been so long a stranger among them, these people
are absolutely enthusiastic in his praise. It is strange! I never saw
any thing like affection in servants, except in a novel.'

Charlotte looked at me with an aspect of amazement; but she was too
polite either to charge me with the true cause of my ill fortune, or to
acquit me at the expense of my countrymen. 'Henry will not let his
friends here forget him,' said she; 'for, however engaged, he never
forgets them. He sends them advice, encouragement, reproof, and whatever
else they most need. Poor Henry! I remember a letter which he wrote to
acquaint me with one of the severest disappointments of his life--a
letter written in the midst of toil and bustle. It contained an order
for comfortable bedding for his bed-ridden nurse.'

'But how could your brother,--how could your parents allow a mere
prejudice to banish him from such strong attachments? Surely he could
have felt no self-reproach for giving evidence against a common thief, a
miscreant who attempted his life!'

'I don't know,' said Charlotte, doubtingly. 'Neil Roy was a well-born
gentleman; and in many respects a very honest man. Besides, where the
punishment is so unjustly disproportioned to the offence, it is not very
pleasant to be concerned in inflicting it. However, it was not that
affair alone which first drove my brother from home. Cecil was partly
right, and partly wrong, in the account she gave you. My mother, you
know, was a stranger; and though she was one of the best and most
respectable of women, yet it was natural that she should retain some of
the prejudices of her country. My father intended settling Henry in a
farm, or educating him for the church; but my mother, I believe, would
have thought either little less than burying him alive. However, she
must have submitted to necessity if the affair of Neil Roy had not
assisted her in persuading my father to send Henry away. Her health,
too, was so fast declining, that my father could refuse her nothing. So
poor Henry was made a peace-offering to my mother's relations, who would
never have any connection with her after her marriage with a Highland
rebel--as they were pleased to call the best born and the most loyal in
the land! Oh, Ellen! it sometimes goes to my heart to think he should
owe so much as a shoe-latchet to those who dared to look down upon his
father. But whatever may happen, Henry can never regret having obeyed a
parent.'

This little narrative was given with as much freedom as if Charlotte and
I had been alone, for our attendants no sooner observed us inclined to
talk apart, than they retreated to such a distance as left us at perfect
liberty. At last, however, they advanced, and the two _gillen comsrian_
took our horses by the bridles, while the rest began to clear away the
loose stones from the tract which was leading us round the brow of an
abrupt mountain. My eyes were involuntarily fixed upon a dell which had
no interest except what it gained from the certainty that a single false
step would bring me a hundred fathoms nearer to it. The golden clouds
that linger after sunset were still throwing strong light upon our path,
while the dell lay in deep shade. I was so new to Highland travelling,
that, in some alarm, I was consulting my attendant upon the expediency
of dismounting, when my attention was diverted by Charlotte. 'Benarde!'
cried she, with such a voice as, had my mother been on earth, I could
have cried, 'My mother!' I looked up; and saw between me and the glowing
west only a naked crag, towering above the vapour which was floating in
the vale.

Presently our path wound round the brow of the mountain which we were
descending; and, gorgeous in all the tints of autumn, harmonised by the
sober shades of evening, Eredine burst on our sight. Charlotte uttered
not a sound. She uncovered her head as if she had entered a temple; and
raised her eyes as if in thanksgiving which words could not speak.

I myself was little more inclined to break the silence imposed by the
scene. Far below our feet lay a lake, motionless, as if never breeze had
ruffled its calm. All there was still as the yet unpeopled earth, except
the gliding shadow of a solitary eagle sailing down the vale. A faint
flush still tinged the silver towards the east; to the west, the huge
Benarde threw upon the waters his own sober majesty of hue. But where
the shade would have been the deepest, it was softened by the long lines
of grey light that imaged the walls of Castle Eredine. Beyond, in a
sheltered valley, the evening smokes floating among the copse-wood
alone betrayed the hamlets, concealed by their own unobtrusive chastity
of colouring.

We continued to descend; and the woods gradually closed the scene from
our view. First, the birch drooped here and there its light sprays from
the crag; then gigantic roots of oak, grappling with the rock, sent
forth their dwarf stems in unprofitable abundance; lower, the vigorous
beech and massy plane threw their strong shadows, and, by degrees,
arranged themselves into a noble avenue. Yet this approach did not
peculiarly belong to Castle Eredine; it led equally to many a more
humble abode. Several of these were scattered by the way-side; and each,
as we passed, poured forth a swarm to welcome Charlotte's return. Every
eye shone with pleasure; yet all was calm and silence. No shouting, no
tumult; none of the sounds which, in my native country, announce vulgar
gladness, disturbed the quiet of the scene. The very children hung down
their smiling sun-burnt faces, and waited with sidelong looks for the
expected notice.

Issuing from the wood, the path now become a well beaten road, led us
through a few small half-enclosed fields of corn and pasture, to a sort
of natural bridge, or rather isthmus; the only access to the rock upon
which Castle Eredine projected into the lake. I must own, that its lofty
title, and Cecil's romantic tales of its ancient possessors, had
ill-prepared me for the edifice which I now beheld. A square tower, with
its narrow arched doorway, was the only trace which remained of warlike
array; and a range of more modern building, with its steep roof, into
which the walls rose in awkward triangles, and its clumsy windows,
through which cross lights streamed from behind, gave me no exalted idea
of the accommodations of Castle Eredine. It seemed, however, that others
found no want of space within its walls; for at least thirty persons, of
different ranks and ages, came forth to receive us.

The foremost of these must have attracted my attention and respect, even
though Charlotte's gesture and joyful exclamation had not announced her
father. Age had not impaired the firmness of his step, nor the erect
majesty of a figure Herculean in all its proportions. His eye retained
its fire; his cheek its ruddy brown; the snowy locks which waved from
beneath his bonnet alone betokened that he had already passed the common
age of man. The plumes by which these locks were shaded chiefly
distinguished his attire; for the rest of his dress was entirely
composed of the scarlet and blue tartan of his clan. Saluting me first
on one cheek, and then on the other, he welcomed me to Eredine, with
little more ceremony, and little less kindness than he received his own
Charlotte; then giving an arm to each, he led us into the sitting-room.

It was a large apartment, panelled all round. Each panel seemed to open
into either a cupboard or a closet,--the walls being thick enough to
admit of either; while each side was a little enlivened by a row of
windows sunk in recesses, every one of which might have contained a
dozen persons. But the gloom of this apartment was completely dispelled
by the blazing of a wood fire, proportioned in size to what more
resembled an alcove than a chimney, and by the cordial looks and kind
attentions which every one seemed disposed to exchange.

So little restraint did my presence occasion,--so easily and naturally
did Eredine, Charlotte, and even the servants, admit me to the
interchange of cordial courtesy, which seemed the established habit of
the family, that, before our substantial supper was ended, I had almost
forgotten that I was a stranger. Indeed, so well did they all understand
and practise the delicacies of hospitality, that, in less than a week, I
was as much at home as if I had been born in Glen Eredine.

In the spirit with which she constantly sought to impress me with
feelings of equality and sisterhood, Charlotte offered to share her
apartment with me, on pretence of its being the most modern in the
Castle.

'Since I have dragged you to the land of ghosts,' said she, 'I am bound
in honour to protect you as well as I can; and Henry has so modernised
my room, that no true Highland ghost would condescend to show his face
in it.'

This room was indeed furnished very differently from the rest, yet still
so that nothing incongruous struck the eye. Many of the elegant
conveniences of modern life found a place there; book-shelves,
drawing-cases, cabinets, all that can be imagined necessary to the light
employments of a gentlewoman, were supplied in abundance; but all were
of such substantial form and materials, that they seemed no intruders
among the more venerable heir-looms of Castle Eredine. A closet, opening
from our bedchamber, and stored with a small but select collection of
books, was appropriated solely to me.

When we had retired for the night, Charlotte, after a thoughtful
silence, laid her arm on my shoulder, and said, 'Ellen, there is a
caution I would give you; I should rather say a favour which I am going
to ask.'

'A favour, dearest Charlotte! I thought it had been decreed that all the
favours were to come from one side! Well! how can you hesitate so?'

'There is a gentleman whom you once mentioned to me, a--a mutual
acquaintance.'

Charlotte's complexion explained her meaning. 'Mr Maitland?' said I.

'Oblige me so far, my dear Ellen, as never to mention his name to my
father.'

'Certainly, since you desire it, I promise you that I never will. I am
persuaded that the reasons must be strong and well weighed which induce
you to use caution with a parent.'

'Yes, they are strong,' said Charlotte, thoughtfully; 'And one day
perhaps you may be satisfied that they are so. It grieves me, my dear
Ellen, to have even the appearance of a secret with you, but I am
satisfied that I am acting as I ought--that the happiness of--of my
life--that even your happiness----'

'Stop, dear Charlotte!' interrupted I:--'believe me I have no wish to
listen to any subject which can give you pain. Continue to do what you
think right. Only let me once more assure you, that I have no interest
whatever in Mr Maitland, except as in the best of men,--the most
disinterested of friends,--a friend whose kindness withstood all my
unworthiness. Oh Charlotte, if Mr Graham knew him as I do, he would let
no prejudice of birth, or of country, deprive his daughter of
happiness,--the honour----'

I was obliged to stop; for I had talked myself into a fit of enthusiasm,
and tears filled my eyes. A pleased smile played round Charlotte's
beautiful mouth; but she turned away without reply, as if unwilling to
cherish a hope which might prove fallacious.

I had some curiosity to know whether the only obstacle to her wishes lay
with her father; but I was deterred from asking questions, by
recollecting her language on a former occasion. Besides, I was afraid
that she might fancy I felt some interest in the disposal of Maitland's
affections.



CHAPTER XXIX

    _Hail awful scenes that calm the troubled breast,
      And woo the weary to profound repose;
    Can passion's wildest uproar lay to rest,
      And whisper comfort to the man of woes!
      Here Innocence may wander safe from foes,
    And Contemplation soar on seraph wings._

                                             Beattie.


'No wonder that my countryman has celebrated the merits of a Scotch
breakfast,' said I, upon seeing the splendour and abundance of the
morning repast at Castle Eredine. The linen and china were exquisitely
delicate; and the table, though loaded with a plenty approaching to
profusion, was arranged with perfect order and neatness. Eredine, for so
I found it was the custom to call Mr Graham, having placed me in a
sturdy, square-built, elbow-chair, with a back lofty and solid enough to
serve every purpose of a screen, began to heap before me all the variety
of food within his reach. In vain did I remonstrate. The ceremonial of
hospitality required that I should be urged even unto loathing. When I
turned to supplicate my host for quarter, and hoped that he was inclined
to relent, an old lady, who sat by me on the other side, assailed me in
the unguarded moment with a new charge of ham and marmalade.

'Ah! if he had seen the breakfasts in my young days!' said Eredine, in
answer to my comment. 'A Glen Eredine breakfast was something
substantial then. It was not children's food that bred the fellows who
fought at Prestonpans.'

'What could you possibly have, sir, that is wanting here?'

The chieftain smiled compassionately upon me, as on a representative of
the sons of little men. 'Why, strong venison soup,' said he, 'and potted
ptarmigans; or, if we were a hunting, a roasted salmon:--hunters are not
nice, you know.'

As soon as we rose from table, Charlotte went to resume her office of
housekeeper, which had, in her absence, been most zealously filled by
one of her innumerable cousins. To associate me in this employment was
one of the friendly arts by which Charlotte contrived to domesticate me
at Eredine; and household affairs furnished some little occupation for
us both, although the establishment at the Castle was then smaller than
it had ever been from time immemorial.

Feudal habits were extinct; and the days were long since gone, when
bands of kinsmen, united in one great family, repaid hospitality and
protection with more than filial veneration and love. Eredine had
outlived three elder sisters, who for the greater part of a century had
resided under the roof where they were born; and two younger brothers,
who, after expiating, by thirty years of exile, their adherence to their
hereditary sovereign, had returned to lay their ashes with those of
their fathers. His eldest son had, a few months before, fallen a
sacrifice to a West Indian climate; his second was banished from home by
circumstances which I have already mentioned. The family, therefore,
consisted of Eredine, his daughter, and myself; four men and seven women
servants; Charlotte's nurse; a blind woman, who, being fit for nothing
else, was stocking-knitter-general to the family, and served, moreover,
as a humble substitute for the bard of other times; two little girls,
one humpbacked, the other sickly; and three boys, two of whom were
maintained because they were orphans, and the third because his
grandmother had been the laird's favourite, some sixty years before;
and, finally, Roban Gorach, Cecil's deserted lover; who, as the humour
served, tended Henry's old white pony, or wandered to all the sacraments
administered within sixty miles round, or sat by his torn oak from morn
to night unquestioned.

But these were by no means the only persons who daily shared in the good
cheer of Castle Eredine. Besides several superannuated people of both
sexes, who, for this very purpose, had been provided with cottages
adjacent to the castle, we had stable-boys, and errand-boys, and
cow-herds, and goose-herds; beggars and travellers by dozens; besides
maintaining, for the day, every tradesman who executed the most trivial
order for the family without doors or within. How was I surprised to
learn, that this establishment was supported by an estate of little
more than a thousand pounds a year!

This family party was, for the present, reinforced by visiters of all
ranks, who came to congratulate Charlotte's return. Among the earliest
of these was my old friend Cecil, who recognized me with tears of joy.
Recovering herself, she began to applaud her own skill in prophecy. 'I
told you,' cried she, 'that ye knew not where a blessing might light;
and there, ye see, ye're in Castle Eredine. And now Mr Henry will be
gathered to you, and that will be seen.'

In answer to my enquiries into her own situation, she informed me that
her husband had returned home, having been disabled by sickness, and
discharged from his regiment as unfit for service. She talked of his
illness, however, without any alarm; for she had travelled on foot to
Breadalbane to bring water from a certain consecrated spring, on
which she fully relied for his cure. 'What grieves us the most,' said
she to me apart, 'is that he's no' fit to help at the laird's shearing
this year; as he had a good right, as well as the rest. And ye see, I
cannot speak to Miss Graham upon that to make his excuse, for she might
think we were _reflecting_, because he got's trouble tending Mr
Kenneth.'

The next day brought the harvest party of which Cecil had spoken. About
four o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by the shrieking and
groaning of a bagpipe under my window; and starting out of bed to
ascertain the occasion of this annoyance, saw about a couple of hundred
men and women collected near the house. These I found were the tenantry
of Glen Eredine, assembled to cut down the landlord's corn; a service
which they were bound to perform without hire. Yet never, in scenes
professedly devoted to amusement, had I witnessed such animating
hilarity as cheered this unrewarded labour. The work was carried on all
day, in measured time to the sound of the bagpipe, yet without causing
any interruption to the jests of the young or the legends of the old. Mr
Graham himself frequently joined in both, without incurring the
slightest danger of forfeiting respect by condescension. Dinner for the
whole party was, of course, despatched from the castle. Fortunately, the
cookery was not very complex, for the old nurse and the blind
stocking-knitter were the only persons left at home to assist Charlotte
and myself in the preparation.

It was customary for the festivities of the day to conclude with a ball
on the old bowling-green; and promising myself some amusement from the
novelty, I repaired to the spot soon after the time when the dancers had
been accustomed to assemble. But no dancers were there. Not a person was
to be seen, except one sickly emaciated creature, wearing a faded
regimental coat over his tartan waistcoat and philibeg, who stood
leaning against a tree with an aspect of hopeless dejection.

Supposing that I had mistaken the place, I enquired of this person
whither I must go to seek the dancers. 'Think ye, lady,' said the man,
with a look somewhat indignant, 'that they would dance here this night?
I hope they're no' so ill-mannered. It would be a fine story for them to
be dancing, and the best blood in Eredine not well cold i' the grave
yet!'

I perceived that he alluded to the recent death of Kenneth Graham; and,
struck with such an instance of delicacy in persons whom I considered as
little better than savages, I was going to enter into further
conversation with the man, when seeing Charlotte at a distance, I
hastened to meet her. I could not prevail upon her to express the
slightest surprise at the sensibility of her countrymen. 'It is just as
I expected,' said she; and she proceeded to inform me, that the person
whom I had quitted was the husband of my old friend Cecil, and the
foster-brother of Kenneth Graham. 'Poor James!' said she; 'I believe it
would have broken his heart if that bowling-green had been profaned with
the sounds of merriment. He visits it every evening at the same hour
when he was wont to come five-and-twenty years ago to play with my
brothers. That poor fellow has given the strongest proofs of the
attachment to a superior which you think so uncommon. As soon as he
heard that my brother was ordered abroad, he left his wife and children,
and explored his way on foot to the south of Ireland, where the
regiment was already embarked. He enlisted; watched his master in the
dreadful disease which few could be found daring enough even to relieve;
followed the remains of his foster-brother to the grave, when sickness
had made him unable to return from the spot; and lay all night on the
earth which covered the head he loved best. Alas! alas! it lies among
stranger-dust, far from us all.'

Although, ever since we had been on confidential habits, Charlotte had
spoken of her dead brother almost as much as of the living one, these
were the only words of lamentation which I ever heard her utter.

On the contrary, the associations with which the remembrance of the dead
was joined seemed to be pleasurable. She appeared to sympathise in the
delight with which Lady Eredine and her son would meet; speaking of them
exactly as she would of living persons possessed of all the sentiments
and functions of mortality.

From these themes the transition was easy to the subject of Henry
Graham,--a subject in which I took almost as much interest as she did
herself; for what girl of one-and-twenty could be uninterested in an
unknown lover? a lover described as handsome, brave, generous, good! and
who had besides fallen in love at first sight; a compliment which, by
the value some ladies put upon it, I suppose is estimated more by its
rarity than its worth. Now, all this my imagination found in Henry
Graham; for I was in the land of imagination. I was more than half
persuaded of my conquest. There was no other way of accounting for his
assiduous good offices; his flattering yet minute description of my
appearance. But Charlotte never directly admitted this explanation of
his conduct, and I durst not venture to show her how far vanity could
lead me in conjecture; though curiosity often made me come as near to
the subject as I dared. 'After all,' I would say to myself, 'what can it
signify to me? I shall never like the man; and I would far rather earn
my bread by labour than by marriage.'

In the mean time, I was as much domesticated at Eredine as if I had
already been a daughter of the family. My kind friend soon found means
to make me consider it as for the present my permanent abode. She knew
me too well to expect, that this could ever take place so long as I felt
myself a useless dependent; and this was, I am persuaded the real cause
which inspired her with an enthusiastic desire to excel in music. There
was no danger that this plea for my detention should soon be exhausted;
for Charlotte's skill hitherto went no farther than jingling a
strathspey upon an excruciating harpsichord. Precisely at the lucky
moment, however, arrived a splendid harp, a present from her considerate
brother; and our labours began with much zeal and some success.

In return, she exerted surprising patience in assisting my study of her
native tongue; and the whole family, myself included, were delighted
with my progress. We make rapid advances in a dialect which is the only
medium of communication with three fourths of the persons around us;
and, in justice to Highland politeness, I must assert, that there is no
language which may be attempted with more perfect security from
ridicule. This acquisition, together with my performance of some Gaelic
songs, brought me into high estimation with my venerable host. He
declared, 'that I could turn Chro challin or Oran gaoil almost as well
as his mother,--_white be the place of her soul!_' and only regretted,
that instead of 'that unhandy thing of a harp, which made trews where
trews should not be, I had not the light lady-like Clarsach, that the
d----d Hanoverians burnt when they ransacked Glen Eredine.'

There might have been danger that my favourite recreation, to which long
abstinence gave all the charm of novelty, should make unreasonable
encroachment on my time. But almost the earliest work of my renovated
judgment had been to impress me with a solemn conviction of the value of
time; and when I recollected that, of the few allotted years of man,
seventeen had already been worse than squandered; that of the uncertain
remainder, a third must be devoted to the harmless enjoyments, a part
rifled by the idle fooleries of others,--an unknown portion laid waste
of joy and usefulness, by sickness, by sorrow, or by that overpowering
languor which palsies at times even the most active spirit;--when I
remembered, that the whole is fugitive in its nature as the colours of
the morning sky, irreversible in its consequence as the fixed decree of
Heaven, I could no longer waste the treasure on the sports of children,
or suffer the jewel to slip from the nerveless grasp of an idiot. I had
formed a plan for the distribution of my time; to which I adhered so
steadily, that I seldom spent an hour altogether unprofitably; that is,
I seldom spent an hour of which the employment had no tendency to
produce rational, benevolent, or devout habits in myself or in others.

Let it not, therefore, be imagined that my whole life and conversation
were as solemn, and as wise, and as tiresome as possible. The flowers of
the moral world were doubtless intended to scatter cheerfulness and
pleasure there; and the woman who contributes nothing to the innocent
amusement of mankind has renounced one purpose of her being. I am
persuaded, that a happier party, or at times a merrier never met, than
assembled round our fireside at Eredine.

Nor was it always confined to the members of our own family. Our
neighbours--and all within twenty miles were our neighbours--often came
with half-a-dozen of their sons and daughters, two or three servants,
and a few horses, to spend some days at Castle Eredine. Uninvited and
unexpected, they were always welcome. No preparation could be made; no
bustle ensued. The guests were for the time members of the household,
and partook in its business, its enjoyments, and its privations. The
morning amusements of the gentlemen furnished us with game; those of the
ladies, with lighter dainties; and our evenings were enlivened by music,
more abundant, it must be confessed, than excellent.

But, though my hours were neither dull nor solitary, I must own, that my
heart leaped light with the hope of something new, when, one morning,
Charlotte, running into the room breathless with delight, exclaimed, 'He
is coming, dearest Ellen! he is coming! He will give up all his
habits,--his pursuits,--he will give back their trash,--he will return
to his father,--to us all!'

'Henry! When, dear Charlotte?'

'Now! Soon! In a week! Oh, if that week were past!'

Charlotte was restless with joy. She left me almost immediately; and I
followed her to her father. The good old man folded us both to his
breast. 'God grant I live this week,' said he, 'and then----' He paused
a little, half ashamed of his emotion; 'I doubt,' said he, with a smile,
'my eyes are not so strong as they have been.' Then disengaging himself
from us, he hurried out upon the road which led to Edinburgh, as if he
had already hoped to meet his son; and repeated the same walk full
twenty times that day. Next, he would count every stage of Henry's
journey, and fix the very hour of his arrival, and order an infinity of
preparations for his reception; and, when he had quite exhausted
himself, he sunk into his great oak-chair ruminating, while a delighted
smile at times crossed his face. 'The little curly-pated dog was his
mother's darling,' cried he; 'and yet I never could find out how that
happened, for there never was a Southron blood-drop in him. He was
always a Graham to the heart's core.'

Had I before been wholly uninterested in Henry's arrival,--had I owed no
obligation to him as the bestower of a secure though humble
independence,--had all the suggestions of vanity been silenced, I must
have sympathised in the joy expressed in every face I saw, in every
voice I heard. The house-maids all claimed the honour of arranging his
apartment; and as the division of labour, and all the distinctions
between cook and chamber-maid, were quite unknown in Glen Eredine, the
honour was bestowed according to seniority. The spinners celebrated
their young master's return in the extemporary songs, so common among
their countrywomen. The men brought home for him as many rocs,
black-cock, and ptarmigan, as would have satiated courteous King
Jamie's ravenous visiter. Charlotte's nurse told me endless anecdotes of
his childhood; and I heard the blind knitter cry out in a tone of
triumph, 'He led me up the loan with's _oun_ hand, sirs; and that's what
he never did to one o' ye all. And shame fa' me, if ever a man lead me
by the right hand again, an it be no Eredine himsel'; and that's not to
be thought.'

The only one who took no share in the cheerful bustle was poor Roban
Gorach; yet he too could in his way, testify affection for his young
master. I had strolled out; and taking my favourite station on a ledge
of rock which overhung the lake, I had suffered my thoughts to shape, I
know not what romantic dream, of Henry Graham, and friendship, and
Charlotte, and Maitland, and Castle Eredine, and castles in the air;
when I was roused by the approach of poor Roban, attended by the old
white pony, which followed him like a dog. He accosted me with an
earnest look, lowering his voice to a confidential tone. 'They say
you're ordained for him,' said he; 'so blessings on your face! take him
peaceably.'

Since I had become a favourite in Glen Eredine, so many dreams and
prophecies had announced me its future mistress, that I had no
difficulty in apprehending his meaning. 'Oh! you must let me refuse a
little at first for decency-sake, Robert,' said I, laughing.

'Mysel' would fain you do's bidding before you be hindered,' said he;
laying his fingers pleadingly upon my arm. 'What if he _would_ see you
going down the loan there, and through the wood, with another man's boy
in bosom?'--he raised his arm, tracing as he spoke the path towards
Cecil's dwelling; then letting it drop unconsciously, he proceeded in
his native tongue, as if he had forgotten my presence. 'He would care
no more for his fine golden watch, and all the parks and _towns_ of
Eredine, than for the wind when _she_ flies by him.'--'But, Robert,'
said I, interrupting his mournful reverie, 'how should you all like to
have a Saxon mistress in the Castle?'--'If it were so ordered,' answered
Robert, 'who could say against?--and we might be very well, though it
were so. Just you forget that you're a stepmother, with your leave; and
we'll all forget it too.'

When I returned to the house, I learnt, what I had indeed inferred from
Roban's language, that Cecil had been there. She came to ask medicine
and advice for her dying husband; but when told the good news of the
day, she retired without suffering Miss Graham's joy to be interrupted
by her melancholy errand. Though, after having lived three months in
Glen Eredine, I could no longer be surprised at this delicacy, it can
never cease to please; and I immediately requested Charlotte to direct
our evening walk toward Cecil's cottage.

We were received at the door by Cecil, who loaded us both with
congratulations; and invited us, as she was accustomed to do, into her
chamber of state, or as she phrased it, 'ben a house.' This apartment
was at that time no unfavourable specimen of Glen Eredine parlours. It
had to be sure an earthen floor not levelled with much nicety, but it
was tolerably clean; it was ceiled with whitened boards, lighted by a
sashed window, furnished with plane-tree chairs and tables, and
ornamented with an open corner cupboard filled with gaudy stone-bowls,
and jugs enriched with humble anacreontics. This was not, however, the
family room; and, finding that poor James inhabited the other end of the
building, we insisted upon adjourning thither.

The humbler apartment was separated from the other by a panelled closet
or rather box, which served the double purpose of bed and partition. The
remaining walls were imperfectly plastered with clay; and the rude
frame-work of the roof was visible, where light enough to make it so was
admitted by the aperture which served for a chimney, and by a window of
four panes, one of which was boarded, and another stuffed with rags.
Beneath the above-mentioned aperture, the bounds of the fire-place were
marked only by a narrow piece of pavement, upon which a turf-fire
smouldered unconfined against the wall. The smoke, thus left at large,
had dyed the rafters of an ebon hue; and, mixing with the condensed
vapour, distilled in inky drops from the roof. The floor was strewed
with water-pails, iron-pots, wooden-ware, and broken crockery. Cecil's
eldest child, a boy of about four years old, tartaned and capped as
martially as any 'gallant Graham' of them all, sprawled contentedly in
the middle of the litter, sharing his supper of barley-bread with an
overgrown pet lamb; and the youngest attired with rather less ceremony,
crouched by the side of a black pot, contesting with the cock the
remains of a mess of oatmeal pottage.

From these postures of ease, however, Cecil instantly snatched them
both. 'Up, ill manners!' cried she; 'think it your credit to stand when
the gentles come to see you.' This maxim she enforced by example, for no
entreaties could prevail upon her to be seated in our presence.

The sallow, haggard countenance of poor James appeared through the open
panel of the bed; and Miss Graham approaching, enquired 'how he felt
himself?'

'Ye're good that asks,' said Cecil, answering for him; 'but he'll never
be better, and he has no worse to be.'

'These people are savages, after all!' thought I. 'Would any humanised
being have pronounced such a sentence in the sick man's hearing?' I
stole a glance towards the bed, half fearing to witness the effect of
her barbarity.

'Trouble must have its time,' said the man cheerfully; 'but we must just
hope it'll no be long now.'

This was so little like fear, that I was obliged to convert the words of
encouragement into those of congratulation; and after Miss Graham had
made some more particular enquiries, I expressed my satisfaction in
observing such apparent resignation.

'Deed, ma'am,' said James, 'I cannot say but that I am willing enough to
depart; I'm whiles feared, indeed; but then I'm whiles newfangled.'

'I'm sure, lady,' said Cecil, tears now streaming down her cheeks, 'he
has no reason to be feared; for he's been a well-living Christian all's
days, and a good husband he's been;--and he shall have no reason to
reflect that he has no' as decent a burial as ever the ground was broken
for in Eredine. And for that we're partly much beholden to you, Miss
Percy,--a blessing on you for that,--and a decent departure might you
have therefor! And thankful may we be, Jamie, that ye'll no lie in
unkent ground, among strangers, and heathens, and all the offscourings
of the earth!'

'No!' said Miss Graham; 'among strangers you shall not lie. You shall be
laid by the place where your foster-brother should have lain; and your
head-stone shall be my memorial of him, and of what you did for him.'

A flash of joy brightened the face of the dying man. He looked at Miss
Graham as if he would fain have thanked her; but though his lips moved,
they uttered no sound. Cecil was voluble in her thanks; and I verily
believe was half reconciled to the prospect of her misfortune, by the
honour which it was to procure for her husband.

'When you see my dear brother,' proceeded Miss Graham, 'tell him, James,
that my only regret now is, that I should show neither love nor honour
to his remains; and that they must rest so far from mine!'

At this moment a casual change of posture made me observe, through the
window, a human figure, partially hid by an old ash tree which grew
within a few feet of the cottage wall. The figure advanced a step; and I
perceived through the dusk of the evening that it was Roban Gorach. He
was leaning against the tree, with his eyes fixed on the window; his
head and arms hanging listlessly down, with that undefinable singularity
of mien which betokens the wandering of the mind.

I was going to call Miss Graham's attention to the circumstance, when
our strange conversation was interrupted by a scream from the youngest
child, whom Cecil had hastily caught up in her arms. The scream was
certainly the shriek of pain, perhaps partly of surprise; yet Cecil
apologising for her child's temper, began to soothe him with the sounds
which nurses apply to mere frowardness, mixing them at times with the
hum of a song. Her remonstrances to the child were given in Gaelic,
interrupted by apologies in English to Miss Graham and myself. More than
once she pronounced the word which signifies 'Go,' 'begone!' with
strong emphasis; holding the child from her as if threatening to forsake
him. He still continued to cry, and she to hush him with a song, which
was at first irregular and indistinct; but which, by degrees, formed
itself into regular rhythm, pronounced with such precision, that even my
slender knowledge of her language was sufficient to render it
intelligible to me; while its occasional interruptions gave me time to
fix the meaning at least in my memory. Of the plaintive simplicity of
the original,--of the effect it derived from the wild and touching air
to which it was sung,--my feeble translation can convey no idea; but I
give the literal English of the whole

    Go to thy rest, oh beloved;
    My soul is pained with thy wailing;
    The wrath of a father is kindled by thy complaining:
                                  Go to thy rest.

    Choice of my heart thou hast been,
    But now I lay thee from my bosom
    That it may receive my betrothed:
                                  Go to thy rest.

    Oh cease thy lamentation;
    Disquiet me no more.
    Till the long night bring morning of pleasant meetings:
                                  Go to thy rest.

Though I, having seen that Roban Gorach was one of Cecil's auditors, was
at no loss to perceive the double meaning of the song, neither poor
James nor Miss Graham could observe any thing peculiar in it. Cecil
never appeared to cast a glance towards the real object of her address;
and at every pause in the air she conversed with an appearance of
perfect unconcern.

I own my esteem for my first Highland friend was far from being improved
by this specimen of her dexterity in intrigue. As soon as Charlotte and
I had taken our leave, I told her what I had observed; but, unwilling
to express a harsh opinion, I waited for her comments. The incident,
however, made no unfavourable impression upon her. 'I know,' said she,
'that Cecil has a great deal of discretion and presence of mind.'

'Presence of mind, I allow; but really it seems to me, that if her
husband had witnessed this piece of management, he would have been very
pardonable for doubting her discretion.'

'How so? do you not think it was prudent to prevent her dying husband
from being shocked by the sight of that poor creature?'

'To tell you the truth, Charlotte, I think such readiness in intrigue
betokens Cecil's fidelity to be at least in danger.'

'Surely you do not suspect--you cannot suppose--setting aside all fear
of God, think you she could make outcasts of her children!--transmit her
name, black with the infamy of being the first unfaithful wife that ever
disgraced Glen Eredine! No, no; Cecil would rather be buried under
Benarde: ay, silly as he is, Robert would rather lay her head in the
grave! No, no, Miss Percy; whatever may be the practice in other
countries, we have reason to be thankful that such atrocities are
unknown in Eredine.'

Charlotte's warm defence was interrupted by the approach of poor Robert,
who was following us home. 'Would ye just please to bid _her_,' said he,
pointing towards Cecil's cottage, 'let me thrash two or three sheaves
for her. She has nobody now to do for her; and if ye'll just allow me,
it's as sure's death, I'll stay in barn, and never go near house to
plague her.'

'I think, Robert,' answered Charlotte, 'it would be very foolish in you
to take so much trouble for one who never even speaks to you.'

'Ay, but yoursel' knows I'm no very wise,' said Robert, with a feeble
smile. Then, after a few moments' silence, he repeated his request. Miss
Graham gave an evasive answer, and he again fell behind; but, during our
walk, he came forward again and again to urge his petition, as if he had
forgotten having offered it before.

'I beg pardon of Cecil and Glen Eredine, Charlotte,' said I. 'I had
forgotten the nature and constancy of this poor young man's attachment,
when I suspected her of imprudence. I am sure that a virtuous man alone
can feel, a woman of discretion alone can inspire, such disinterested,
such unconquerable affection.'

'You are right, Ellen. Looseness of morals on the one side, or even a
very venial degree of levity on the other, is fatal to all the loftier
forms of passion. I believe even perfect frankness of manners is hostile
to them: it leaves too little for the imagination.'

We both walked on musing, till my dream was broken by our arrival at the
gate. 'Is your brother reserved?' said I, very consciously.

'I never found him so,' returned Charlotte, laughing; 'but you have so
much imagination that I believe it will do, notwithstanding.'

The day approached when this object of universal interest was to arrive;
and every stage of his journey, every hour of its duration, was counted
a hundred times. 'Four whole days still!'--'To-night he will sleep in
Scotland!'--'By this time to-morrow!'--In how many tones of impatience,
of exultation, of delight, were these sentences uttered!

The father's joy was the least exclamatory. After the first emotion was
past, he seemed to think much expression of his feelings unsuitable to
his years; though every thing 'put him in mind what Henry said when he
was last at home;' or, 'what Henry did when a boy;' and he every now and
then shook Charlotte and me by the hand with such a look of
congratulation!

He hinted some intention of riding as far as Aberfoyle to meet his son;
though he seemed to doubt whether this were altogether consistent with
his paternal dignity. 'It is not what one could do for every young man,'
said he; 'but Henry was never a sort of boy that is easily spoiled.' So
with this salvo, with which many a father has excused his
self-indulgence, Eredine determined to meet Henry at Aberfoyle.

On the eventful morning the whole family arose with the dawn. Almost the
first person I saw was Eredine, arrayed and accoutred in the perfect
costume of his country, marching up and down in the court with even more
than his usual elasticity of step. The good old gentleman prepared for
his journey with all the alertness of five-and-twenty. 'Come,
Charlotte,' said he, 'get me a breakfast fit for a man. Remember I have
more than sixty miles to ride to-day. Miss Percy, do you think any of
your Lowland lads of seventy-six could do as much? Well, well, wait till
nine o'clock at night; and, God willing, I'll show you a lad worth a
fine woman's looking at.'

In spite of the entreaties of old Donald MacIan and the family piper,
who would fain have led forth the whole clan, Eredine set out attended
only by his household servants. But as soon as the laird was gone,
Donald followed his own inclinations. The piper marched through every
_baile_ in the Glen, pouring forth a torrent of vigorous discords,
which he called the '_Graham's Gathering_;' then took the road towards
Aberfoyle, followed by the train whom he had assembled. By noon,
scarcely a man was left in Glen Eredine.

On the other hand, the women came in crowds to the Castle, each bringing
a cheese, a kid, a pullet, or whatever else her cabin could supply; and,
having deposited these '_compliments_,' as they called them, they
quietly returned to their homes. The servants ran idly bustling about
the house, forgetting every part of their business which did not refer
to Mr Henry. One began to air his linen as soon as day dawned. Another
piled heap after heap of turf upon his fire. A third, at the expense of
the state bedchamber, embellished his apartment with a carpet not
unlike, both in pattern and size, to a chess-board. I found a fourth
busied in anointing his leather-bottomed chairs with a mixture of oil
and soot; scrubbing this Hottentot embrocation into the grain with a
shoe-brush. 'I'm just giving them a bit clean for him,' said she, in
answer to my exclamation of amazement. 'He had always a cleanly
turn,--God save him!'

At last all preparations perforce were finished; and the day then seemed
endless to us all. Charlotte was silent and restless. She tried to work;
but it would not do; she tried to read, and succeeded no better. She
visited her brother's apartment again and again, and could never satisfy
herself that all was ready for his reception. She began to fear that he
might not arrive that night, yet she was half angry with me for
admitting the possibility. Towards evening she stationed herself in a
window to watch for him; turning away sometimes with tears of
disappointment in her eyes, and then resuming her watch once more.

Twilight closed in the stillness of a frosty night. Charlotte drew me to
the gate to listen. All was profoundly quiet. At last a dog bayed at a
distance. 'I hear the pipe!' said Charlotte, grasping my arm. I
listened. The sound was faintly heard, then lost, then heard again. By
degrees it swelled into distinctness; the trampling of horses,--the
tread of a multitude was heard,--voices mingled with the sound.
Charlotte ran forward, and then returned again. 'No! I cannot meet him
before all these people,' said she; and we retreated to the house.

I saw through the dusk the stately figures of the chief and his son
approaching on foot from the gate where they had dismounted; and I stole
back into the parlour, unwilling that my presence should embarrass the
expected meeting. Yet, with a fluttering heart, I listened eagerly to
their quickened steps,--to the clasp of affection,--to the whisper of
rapture. 'Brother!'--'Charlotte!' pronounced in the scarcely articulate
accents of ecstasy, were for some moments the only words uttered; the
next that reached my ear, were those in which the traveller eagerly
enquired for me. I sprang forward, for it was a well remembered voice
that spoke; but the next moment I shrank before the flashing glance of
Maitland!


CHAPTER XXX

    _Here have I found at last a home of peace,
    To hide me from the world! far from its noise,
    To feed that spirit which, though----
    ----linked to human beings by the bond
    Of earthly love, hath yet a loftier aim
    Than perishable joy! and through the calm
    That sleeps amid this mountain solitude,
    Can hear the billows of eternity,
    And hear delighted!_

                                             John Wilson.


'But seriously, Charlotte,' said I, when at a late hour we found
ourselves once more alone in our chamber, 'seriously, do you think it
was quite right in you to use this concealment with me?'

'Seriously, I think it was. Long before I knew you, I could have guessed
that you would dislike receiving even a trifling service from Mr ----.
No, I never yet called Henry Graham by that upstart mercantile name, and
I never will. To tell you the truth, Ellen, my brother had so far made
me his confidant, that, judging of you by myself, I thought you would
rather lose your money than owe it to his good offices.'

'I am sorry you thought it necessary to humour my pride at such an
expense. Humbled and mortified I might have been by any kindness from Mr
Maitland; but I have perhaps deserved the humiliation more than the
kindness. He owes me a little mortification, for drawing him into the
greatest folly he ever was guilty of.'

'Oh you must not imagine that all my discretion was exerted only to
humour your saucy spirit. I had a purpose of my own to serve. I dare
say we should never have slid into any real intimacy, if you had known
me to be the sister of a quondam lover; watching, no doubt, with a
little womanly jealousy, the character of one whom my favourite brother
_once_ loved better than me.'

'I am persuaded this could have made little difference; for my faults,
unfortunately, will not be concealed; and my good qualities I shall
always be willing enough to display.'

'Oh, to be sure, my dear humble Miss Percy would knowingly and wittingly
have come here to ingratiate herself with us all! No doubt, you would
have been much more at home with us, had you known our connection with
your old admirer! and no doubt, you would have quietly waited his
arrival here, that you might be courted in due form!'

'Pshaw, Charlotte, I am sure that it--I hope--I mean, I am quite certain
that your brother has no such nonsense in his thoughts. And I am sure it
is much better it should be so; for you know I have always told you that
I have a natural indifference about me--Heigho!'

'What! even after you have seen that "it was your duty to be in love
long ago!" Will you "deprive" yourself of "the honour," the
"happiness"----'

'Surely, Charlotte, you will never be so mischievous, so cruel, as to
repeat these thoughtless, unmeaning expressions to your brother! You
know they were spoken under entire misconception. And, besides, to be
sensible of what I ought once to have done is a very different thing
from being able to do it now.'

'Make yourself quite easy, my dear Ellen,' said Charlotte, with a
provoking smile, 'I have more _esprit de corps_ than to tell a lady's
secret. Besides, even for my brother's own sake, I shall leave him to
make discoveries for himself. But by the way, it is very good-natured in
me to promise all this; for I have reason to be angry, that you think it
necessary to warn me against repeating any thing uttered in the mere
unguardedness of chit-chat.'

I made no apology; for I have such an abhorrence of trick and
contrivance of every kind, that, to own the truth, I, at that moment,
felt half-justified in withdrawing part of my confidence from Charlotte.
'How in the world did such a scheme occur to you?' said I, after a
pause. 'Nothing like a plot ever enters my head.'

'It occurred to me in the simplest way possible, my dear. Henry writes
to me remitting your money; describing you so as to prevent any chance
of imposition; and charging me not to rest till I have found you. "It
will distress her," says he, "to owe this little service to me, but
perhaps there is no remedy." Now, was not the very spirit of
contradiction enough to make one devise a remedy? Then he goes on--stay,
here is the letter:--

'"If she be found, I do not ask you to receive her to your acquaintance,
to your intimacy. There is something in Miss Percy which will
irresistibly win you to both. But I do ask you to tell me, with perfect
candour, the impression which her character makes upon your mind. Tell
me, with minute exactness, of her temper, her sentiments, her
employments, her pleasures. Describe even her looks and gestures. There
is meaning in the least of them. Write fearlessly--I am no weak lover
now. I know you ladies are all firm believers in the eternity of love;
and one part of the passion is indeed immortal in a heart of ordinary
warmth and delicacy. My interest in Miss Percy's welfare and improvement
is not less strong than in yours, my own Charlotte. Perhaps the
precariousness of her situation even turns my anxieties more strongly
towards her. Of course, this will no longer be the case when I know that
she is safe at Eredine; for you must prevail upon her to visit Eredine.
She has a thousand little _womanlinesses_ about her, which you could
never observe in an ordinary acquaintance of calls and tea-drinkings;
and you must be intimate with her before you can know or value that
delightful warmth and singleness of heart, which cannot but attach you.
I am sure she will bewitch my father. There is a gladness in her smile
that will delight his very soul."

'Have not Henry and I shown a very decent portion of Highland
second-sight and discretion, think you, Ellen? His prediction has been
quite verified; and I am sure I have managed the plot incomparably.'

'Ah, but Charlotte, after all, I wonder how you found it practicable. It
was a hundred to one that somebody should have let me into the secret.'

'Hum! I might have been in some danger while we were in Edinburgh,
though few people there knew any thing of the matter. But, from the
moment we reached Glen Eredine, I knew we were safe. Nobody here would
mention to an inmate of our family the only shade that ever rested on
its name. Thank Heaven, even this stain is effaced now;--if, indeed, it
be a stain to submit to a temporary degradation in obedience to a
mother. You need not smile, Ellen. I am not so prejudiced as you think
me. I know that, if the name of those merchants had been mean as
obscurity could make it, it would have become honourable when borne by
Henry Graham. And to be sure, all professions are alike in the eye of
reason; only there are some which I think a gentleman should leave to
people who need money to distinguish them.'

'Well,' said I, laughing, 'now that you have convinced me that you have
no prejudice, tell me how you could be sure that I only knew your
brother by his "upstart mercantile name." If he had had the spirit of
his sister, he could not have refrained from hinting his right to be
called a Graham.'

'Oh, but Henry has nothing boastful in his disposition; and I knew that,
having given up his name to please his uncle, he scorned to make the
sacrifice by halves. The old gentleman hated us all as a clan of rebels;
and, while he lived, my mother would never even allow us to address our
letters to Henry under his real name; and I don't believe poor Henry
himself ever mentioned it to a human being. So, before I saw you, I
guessed that you might not be in the secret; and the moment I entered on
the business with you, I found I had guessed right. But I dare say Henry
will tell you his whole story now; for you must have many a confidential
_tête-à-tête_.'

Confidential _tête-à-têtes_ with Mr Maitland! The idea led me into such
a reverie, that before I spoke again Charlotte was in bed, and asleep.

I rose early; and yet, in three months of country negligence, my clothes
had all grown so troublesomely unbecoming, that, before I could make
them look tolerable, the family were assembled at breakfast. Maitland
took his place by me. 'I will sit between my sisters,' said he; and from
that time he called me, 'Sister Ellen.' The kindness of his manner made
me burn with shame at the recollection of my ungenerous purpose against
his peace. I held down my head, and was ready to thank Heaven that I saw
him well and happy. I was very glad, however, when I handed him his tea,
that my hand and arm were quite as beautiful as ever. My embarrassment
soon wore away. Maitland had evidently forgiven, he had almost, I
thought, forgotten my misconduct. So respectful, so kind were his
attentions, so equally divided between Charlotte and me, that I soon
forgot my restraint; and caught myself chattering and playing the fool
in my own natural manner.

The day was past before I was aware; and every day stole away I know not
how. Their flight was marked only by our progress in the books which
Maitland read with Charlotte and me; or by that of a large plantation
which we all superintended together. Yet I protest, I have suffered more
weariness in one party of pleasure, than I did in a whole winter in Glen
Eredine. For, though the gentlemen always spent the mornings apart from
us, Charlotte and I were at no loss to fill up the hours of their
absence in the duties consequent upon being not only joint housewives in
the Castle, but schoolmistresses, chamber-council, physicians,
apothecaries, and listeners-general to all the female inhabitants of
Glen Eredine. What endless, what innumerable stories did this latter
office oblige me to hear? I am persuaded that I know not only the
present circumstances and characters of every person in the Glen, but
their family history from time immemorial, besides certain prophetic
glimpses of their future fortunes.

I entirely escaped, however, the heavier labour of entertaining idle
gentlemen; for the bitterest storm of winter never confined Eredine or
Mr Graham to the fireside. Wrapped in their plaids, they braved the
blast, as the sports or the employments of the field required; and
returned prepared to be pleased with every thing at home. Our evenings
were delightful; enlivened as they were by Eredine's cheerfulness,
Charlotte's frank vivacity, and Henry's sly quiet humour.

How often in their course did I wonder that I could ever think Maitland
cold and stately? His extensive information, his acquaintance with
scenes and manners which were new to us all, did indeed render his
conversation a source of instruction, as well as of amusement; but no
man was ever more free from that tendency towards dogma and harangue,
which is so apt to infect those who chiefly converse with inferiors. He
joined his family circle, neither determined to be wise nor to be witty,
but to give and receive pleasure. His was the true fire of conversation;
the kindly warmth was essential to its nature, the brilliance was an
accident. Maitland, indeed--but I must bid farewell to that name, the
only subject on which I cannot sympathise with the friends whom I love
the best. To me, though it be coupled with feeling of self-reproach and
regret, it is associated too with all that is venerable in worth, and
all that is splendid in eloquence. I exchange it for a noble name,--a
name which has mingled with many a wild verse, and many a romantic
tale,--a name which the historian and the poet shall celebrate when they
blazon actions more dazzling, but not more virtuous than those which
daily marked the life of Henry Graham!

Spring came; and never, since the first spring adorned Eden, did that
season appear so lovely! So soft were its colours, so balmy its breezes,
so pure, so peaceful its moonlight,--such repose, such blest seclusion,
such confidential kindly home-breathing sweetness were in every scene! I
shall never forget the delightful coolness of a shower that dimpled the
calm lake, as Graham and I stood sheltered by an old fantastic fir-tree.
No sound was heard but the hush of the rain drops, and now and then the
distant wailing of the water-fowl. 'How often, both sleeping and awake,
have I dreamt of this!' said Graham, in the low confiding tone which
scarcely disturbed the stillness. 'And even now, I can scarcely believe
that it is not all a dream. This profound repose! every shadow sleeping
just where it lay, when I used to wonder what immeasurable depth of
waters could so represent the vault of heaven! And after my weary exile,
to be thus near to all that is dearest to me,--to feel their very
touch,--their very breath on my cheek----'

I know not how it happened, but at that moment, I breathed with some
difficulty, and moved a little away. But then I suddenly recollected
that Charlotte was standing at his other side; and I moved back again,
lest he should think me very silly indeed. For Mr Graham was no lover of
mine; that is, he never talked of love to me; but I had begun to feel an
odd curiosity to know whether he ever would talk of it, and when.

I pondered this matter very deeply for some days; and, after sundry
lonely rambles, and sederunts under the aforesaid fir-tree, I convinced
myself that, if Mr Graham chose to make love, I could not, without
abominable ingratitude, refuse to listen.

I had returned from one of these rambles, and was just going to enter
the parlour, when, as I opened the door, I was arrested by the voice of
Graham within, speaking in that impressive tone of suppressed emotion
which he had already fixed irrevocably in my recollection. 'If it be
so,' said he, 'I am gone to-morrow. This day se'nnight I shall be in
London.'

I was thunderstruck. He was going then without a thought of me! My hand
dropped from the lock; and I turned away, in a confused desire to escape
from his sight and hearing.

'Bless me! Ellen! what is the matter with you?' cried Charlotte, whom I
met on the stair. I hurried past her without speaking, and shut myself
into my own apartment.

'What _is_ the matter with me!' said I, throwing myself on a seat. The
question was no sooner asked than answered; and, though I was alone, I
could not help covering my face with my hands. The first distinct
purpose which broke in upon my amazement and consternation was, to see
Graham no more; to remain in my place of refuge till he was gone; and
then--it did not signify what then!--all after-life must be a blank
then!

However, I was obliged to yield to Charlotte's entreaties for admission;
and, though all the interests of life were so soon to close, I was
obliged to take my tea; and then I was half forced to try the open air,
as a remedy for the headach, to which, like all heroines, I ascribed my
agitation. I somewhat repented of this compliance, however, when I found
that Graham was to be the companion of my walk; and, though I could not
decently refuse to take his arm, I endeavoured to look as frozen and
disagreeable as possible. He spoke to me, however, with such kind
solicitude; such respectful tenderness, that I was soon a little
reconciled to myself and him; and when Charlotte declared that she must
stop to visit a sick cottager, and he would by no means allow me to
breathe the close air of the cabin, I must own that I began to feel an
instinctive desire to escape a _tête-à-tête_. But I had not presence of
mind enough to defeat his purpose, and we pursued our walk together.

He led me towards a little woody dell; I talking laboriously without
having any thing to say, he preserving an abstracted silence. But this
could not long continue; and, by the time we had lost sight of human
dwelling, our conversation was confined to short sentences, which, at
intervals of some minutes, made the listener start. In mere escape from
the awkwardness of my situation, I uttered some commonplace on the
beauty of the scenery; and desired Graham to look back towards the
bright lake, seen through the vista formed by the shaggy rocks, which
threw a twilight round us.

'Yes,' said he, with a faint smile; 'let us stand and look at it
together for a few short moments. Perhaps one of us will never again see
it with pleasure. Lean on me, dear Miss Percy, as you are used to do,
and let me be happy while I dare.'

He paused, but my eloquence was exhausted. I could not utter a word.

'This night, this very hour,' he went on, 'must make all these beauties
a sickening blank to me, or perhaps heighten their interest a thousand
fold! Before we part this night, Ellen, I must learn from you whether
duty and pleasure are never to unite for me. You know how long I have
loved you, but I fear you can scarcely guess how tenderly. Dearest
Ellen! think what the affection must be, which withstood your errors,
your indifference, your scorn;--which neither time nor absence, nor
reason, could overcome. Think what it must be now, when I see thee all
that man ought to love! To live without you now, to remember thy form in
every scene, and know that thou art gone:--oh, Ellen! do not force me to
bear this! Say that you will permit me to try what perseverance, what
love unutterable, can do to win for me such affection as will satisfy
your own sense of duty, your own innocent mind, in that blessed
connection which would make us more than lovers or friends to each
other.'

He paused in vain for a reply. If the fate of the universe had depended
on my speaking, I could have uttered nothing intelligible. I suppose,
however, the pleader began to conceive good hopes of his cause; for a
certain degree of saucy exultation mingled with the tones of entreaty,
as he said, 'Speak to me, dearest Ellen--only one word. Tell me that I
may one day hope to hear you own, that friendship, or habit, or call it
what you will, has made me necessary to your happiness.'

I would have given the world for some expression that should convey
decent security to the worthy heart of Graham, without quite betraying
the weakness of my own. 'I cannot promise,' said I, without daring to
look up, 'that ever you will bring me to actual confession.'

'Nay, Ellen,' said the unreasonable creature, 'think you this little
coquettish answer will content a man who asks his whole happiness from
you?'

'I am sure I do not mean to coquet. Tell me what you wish me--what I
ought to say, and I will say it,--if I can.'

'My own, my bewitching Ellen--' said Graham.

But hold! I will not tell what he said. If Henry Graham for once spoke
nonsense, it would ill become me to record it. Nor will I relate my
answer; because, in truth, I know not what it was. But Graham understood
it to mean, that I was no longer the arrogant girl whose understanding,
dazzled by prosperity, was blind to his merit; whose heart, hardened by
vanity, was insensible to his love; no longer the thoughtless being
whose hopes and wishes were engrossed by the most substantial of all the
cheats that delude us in this world of shadows;--but a humbled creature,
thankful to find, in his sound mind and steady principle, a support for
her acknowledged weakness;--a traveller to a better country, pleased to
meet a fellow-pilgrim, who, animating her diligence, and checking her
wanderings, might soothe the toils of her journey, and rejoice with her
for ever in its blessed termination.

I have now been many years a wife; and, in all that time, have never
left, nor wished to leave, Glen Eredine. Graham is still a kind of
lover; and though I retain a little of the coquettish sauciness of Ellen
Percy, I here confess that he is, if it be possible, dearer to me than
when he first folded his bride to his heart, and whispered, 'Mine for
ever.'

We are still the guests of our venerable father; and within this hour he
told me, that his heart makes no difference between me and his own
Charlotte. Some misses lately arrived from a boarding-school, have begun
to call my sister an old maid; yet I do not perceive that this
cabalistic term has produced any ill effect on Charlotte's temper, or on
her happiness.

I am the mother of three hardy, generous boys, and two pretty,
affectionate little girls. But far beyond my own walls extend the
charities of kindred. Many a smoke, curling in the morning sun, guides
my eye to the abode of true, though humble friends; for every one of
this faithful romantic race is united to me by the ties of relationship.
I am the mother of their future chieftain. Their interests, their joys,
their sorrows, are become my own.

Having in my early days seized the enjoyments which selfish pleasure can
bestow, I might now compare them with those of enlarged affections, of
useful employment, of relaxations truly social, of lofty contemplation,
of devout thankfulness, of glorious hope. I might compare them!--but the
Lowland tongue wants energy for the contrast.



CHAPTER I


It was on a still evening in June, that Laura Montreville left her
father's cottage, in the little village of Glenalbert, to begin a
solitary ramble. Her countenance was mournful, and her step languid; for
her health had suffered from long confinement, and her spirits were
exhausted by long attendance on the deathbed of her mother. That labour
of duty had been lessened by no extrinsic circumstance; for Lady Harriet
Montreville was a peevish and refractory patient; her disorder had been
tedious as well as hopeless; and the humble establishment of a half-pay
officer furnished no one who could lighten to Laura the burden of
constant attendance. But Laura had in herself that which softens all
difficulty, and beguiles all fatigue--an active mind, a strong sense of
duty, and the habit of meeting and of overcoming adverse circumstances.

Captain Montreville was of a family ancient and respectable, but so far
from affluent, that, at the death of his father, he found his wealth, as
a younger son, to consist only of £500, besides the emoluments arising
from a lieutenancy in a regiment of foot. Nature had given him a fine
person and a pleasing address; and to the national opinions of a Scotish
mother, he was indebted for an education, of which the liberality suited
better with his birth than with his fortunes. He was in London
negotiating for the purchase of a company, when he accidentally met with
Lady Harriet Bircham. Her person was shewy, and her manners had the
glare, even more than the polish of high life. She had a lively
imagination, and some wit; had read a little, and knew how to shew that
little to advantage. The fine person of Montreville soon awakened the
only sort of sensibility of which Lady Harriet was possessed; and her
preference was sufficiently visible in every step of its progress. To be
distinguished by a lady of such rank and attractions, raised in
Montreville all the vanity of three-and-twenty; and, seen through that
medium, Lady Harriet's charms were magnified to perfections. Montreville
soon was, or fancied himself, desperately in love. He sued, and was
accepted with a frankness, to which some stiff advocates for female
decorum might give the harsh name of forwardness. Montreville was in
love, and he was pleased to call it the candour of a noble mind.

As his regiment was at this time under orders for the West Indies, Lady
Harriet prevailed on him to exchange to half-pay; and her fortune being
no more than £5000, economy, no less than the fondness for solitude
natural in young men in love, induced him to retire to the country with
his bride, who had reasons of her own for wishing to quit London. He had
been educated in Scotland, and he remembered its wild scenery with the
enthusiasm of a man of taste, and a painter. He settled therefore in the
village of Glenalbert, near Perth; and to relieve his conscience from
the load of utter idleness at twenty-three, began the superintendence of
a little farm. Here the ease and vivacity of Lady Harriet made her for a
while the delight of her new acquaintance. She understood all the arts
of courtesy; and, happy herself, was for a while content to practise
them. The store of anecdote, which she had accumulated in her
intercourse with the great, passed with her country neighbours for
knowledge of the world. To Scotish ears, the accent of the higher ranks
of English conveys an idea of smartness, as well as of gentility; and
Lady Harriet became an universal favourite.

Those who succeed best in amusing strangers, are not, it has been
remarked, the most pleasing in domestic life: they are not even always
the most entertaining. Lady Harriet's spirits had ebbs, which commonly
took place during her tête-à-têtes with Captain Montreville. Outward
attractions, real or imaginary, are the natural food of passion: but
sound principles must win confidence, and kindness of heart engage
affection. Poor Montreville soon gave a mournful assent to these truths;
for Lady Harriet had no principles, and her heart was a mere 'pulsation
on the left side.' Her passion for her husband soon declined; and her
more permanent appetite for admiration finding but scanty food in a
solitary village, her days passed in secret discontent or open
murmurings. The narrowness of their finances made her feel the necessity
of economy, though it could not immediately instruct her in the art of
it; and Montreville, driven from domestic habits by the turmoil of a
household, bustling without usefulness, and parsimonious without
frugality, was on the point of returning to his profession, or of
seeking relief in such dissipation as he had the means of obtaining,
when the birth of a daughter gave a new turn to all his hopes and
wishes.

'I should not wish the girl to be a beauty,' said he to his friend, the
village pastor. 'A pretty face is of no use, but to blind a lover';--and
he sighed, as he recollected his own blindness. Yet he was delighted to
see that Laura grew every day more lovely. 'Wit only makes women
troublesome,' said he;--but before Laura was old enough to shew the
uncommon acuteness of her understanding, he had quite forgotten that he
ever applied the remark to her. To amuse her infancy became his chosen
recreation; to instruct her youth was afterwards his favourite
employment. Lady Harriet, too, early began to seek food for her vanity
in the superior endowments of her child, and she forthwith determined
that Laura should be a paragon. To perfect her on Nature's plan, never
entered the head of this judicious matron; she preferred a plan of her
own, and scorned to be indebted to the assistance of nature, even for
any part of the perfect structure which she resolved to rear. The temper
of Laura, uniformly calm and placid, was by nature slightly inclined to
obstinacy. Lady Harriet had predetermined that her daughter should be a
model of yielding softness. Laura's spirits were inexhaustible; Lady
Harriet thought nothing so interesting as a pensive beauty. Laura was
both a reasonable and a reasoning creature: her mother chose that she
should use the latter faculty in every instance, except where maternal
authority or opinion was concerned. Innumerable difficulties, therefore,
opposed Lady Harriet's system; and as violent measures ever occur first
to those who are destitute of other resources, she had recourse to so
many blows, disgraces, and deprivations, as must have effectually ruined
the temper and dispositions of her pupil, if Laura had not soon learnt
to look upon the ungoverned anger of her mother as a disease, to which
she owed pity and concealment. This lesson was taught her partly by the
example of her father, partly by the admonitions of Mrs Douglas, wife to
the clergyman of the parish.

This lady was in every respect Lady Harriet's opposite. Of sound sense,
rather than of brilliant abilities; reserved in her manners, gentle in
her temper, pious, humble, and upright; she spent her life in the
diligent and unostentatious discharge of Christian and feminine duty;
beloved without effort to engage the love, respected without care to
secure the praise of man. She had always treated the little Laura with
more than common tenderness; and the child, unused to the fascinations
of feminine kindness, repaid her attention with the utmost enthusiasm of
love and veneration. With her she passed every moment allowed her for
recreation; to her she applied in every little difficulty; from her she
solicited every childish indulgence. The influence of this excellent
woman increased with Laura's age, till her approbation became essential
to the peace of her young friend, who instinctively sought to read, in
the expressive countenance of Mrs Douglas, an opinion of all her words
and actions. Mrs Douglas, ever watchful for the good of all who
approached her, used every effort to render this attachment as useful as
it was delightful, and gradually laid the foundation of the most
valuable qualities in the mind of Laura. By degrees she taught her to
know and to love the Author of her being, to adore him as the bestower
of all her innocent pleasures, to seek his favour, or to tremble at his
disapprobation in every hour of her life. Lady Harriet had been educated
among those who despised or neglected the peculiar tenets of the
Christian faith; she never thought of them, therefore, but as an affair
that gave scope to lively argument. On Mrs Douglas's own mind they had
their proper effect; and she convinced Laura that they were not subjects
for cavil, but for humble and thankful acceptation.

In as far as the religious character can be traced to causes merely
natural, it may be formed by those who obtain over a mind of sensibility
and reflection the influence which affection bestows, provided that they
are themselves duly impressed with the importance, the harmony, the
excellence of what they teach. Laura early saw the Christian doctrines,
precepts and promises, warm the heart, and guide the conduct, and
animate the hopes of her whom she loved best. Sympathy and imitation,
the strongest tendencies of infancy, first formed the disposition which
reason afterwards strengthened into principle, and Laura grew up a pious
Christian.

It is the fashion of the age to account for every striking feature of a
character from education or external circumstance. Those who are fond of
such speculations may trace, if they can, the self-denying habits of
Laura, to the eagerness with which her enthusiastic mind imbibed the
stories of self-devoting patriots and martyrs, and may find, in one
lesson of her preceptress, the tint which coloured her future days. The
child had been reading a narrative of the triumphant death of one of the
first reformers, and, full of the emulation which the tale of heroic
virtue inspires, exclaimed, her eyes flashing through their tears, her
little form erect with noble daring,--'Let them persecute me and I will
be a martyr.' 'You may be so now, to-day, every day,' returned Mrs
Douglas. 'It was not at the stake that these holy men began their
self-denial. They had before taken up their cross daily; and whenever,
from a regard to duty, you resign any thing that is pleasing or valuable
to you, you are for the time a little martyr.'

In a solitary village, remote from her equals in age and rank, Laura
necessarily lived much alone, and in solitude she acquired a grave and
contemplative turn of mind. Far from the scenes of dissipation and
frivolity, conversant with the grand and the sublime in nature, her
sentiments assumed a corresponding elevation. She had heard that there
was vice in the world: she knew that there was virtue in it; and, little
acquainted with other minds, deeply studious of her own, she concluded
that all mankind were, like herself, engaged in a constant endeavour
after excellence; that success in this struggle was at once virtue and
happiness, while failure included misery as well as guilt. The habit of
self-examination, early formed, and steadily maintained, made even
venial trespass appear the worst of evils;--while, in the labours of
duty and the pleasures of devotion, she found joys which sometimes rose
to rapture.

The capricious unkindness of her mother gave constant exercise to her
fortitude and forbearance, while the principle of charity, no less than
the feelings of benevolence, led to frequent efforts of self-denial. The
latter virtue became daily more necessary, for mismanagement had now
brought her mother's fortune almost to a close; and Captain Montreville,
while he felt that she was injuring his child, could not prevail on
himself to withhold from Lady Harriet the control of what he considered
her own, especially as her health was such as to afford a plea for
indulgence.

Laura had reached her sixteenth year, when Mr Douglas was induced, by a
larger benefice, to remove to a parish almost twenty miles distant from
Glenalbert; and parting with her early friend, was the severest sorrow
that Laura had ever yet known. Captain Montreville promised, however,
that his daughter should often visit the new parsonage; but Lady
Harriet's increasing illness long prevented the performance of his
promise. After a confinement of many months she died, and was lamented
by her husband, with that sort of sorrow which it usually costs a man to
part with an object which he is accustomed to see, when he knows that he
shall see it no more.

It was on the third evening after her mother's funeral, that Captain
Montreville prevailed on his daughter to take a solitary walk. Slowly
she ascended the hill that overlooked the village, and, stopping near
its brow, looked back towards the churchyard, to observe a brown hillock
that marked the spot where her mother slept. Tears filled her eyes, as,
passing over long intervals of unkindness, she recollected some casual
proof of maternal love; and they fell fast as she remembered, that for
that love she could now make no return. She turned to proceed;--and the
moist eye sparkled with pleasure, the faded cheek glowed with more than
the flush of health, when, springing towards her, she beheld the
elegant, the accomplished, Colonel Hargrave. Forgotten was languor;
forgotten was sorrow; for Laura was just seventeen, and Colonel Hargrave
was the most ardent, the most favoured of lovers. His person was
symmetry itself; his manners had all the fascination that vivacity and
intelligence, joined to the highest polish, can bestow. His love for
Laura suited with the impetuosity of his character, and for more than a
year he had laboured with assiduity and success to inspire a passion
corresponding to his own. Yet it was not Hargrave whom Laura loved; for
the being on whom she doated had no resemblance to him, but in
externals. It was a creature of her own imagination, pure as her own
heart, yet impassioned as the wildest dreams of fiction,--intensely
susceptible of pleasure, and keenly alive to pain, yet ever ready to
sacrifice the one and to despise the other. This ideal being, clothed
with the fine form, and adorned with the insinuating manners, and
animated with the infectious love of Hargrave, what heart of woman could
resist? Laura's was completely captivated.

Hargrave, charmed with her consummate loveliness, pleased with her
cheerful good sense, and fascinated with her matchless simplicity, at
first sought her society without thought but of present gratification,
till he was no longer master of himself. He possessed an ample fortune,
besides the near prospect of a title; and nothing was farther from his
thoughts, than to make the poor unknown Laura a sharer in these
advantages. But Hargrave was not yet a villain, and he shuddered at the
thought of seduction. 'I will see her only _once_ more', said he, 'and
then tear myself from her for ever.'--'Only this once,' said he, while
day after day he continued to visit her,--to watch with delight, and to
cherish with eager solicitude, the tenderness which, amidst her daily
increasing reserve, his practised eye could distinguish. The passion
which we do not conquer, will in time reconcile us to any means that
can aid its gratification. 'To leave her now would be dishonourable, it
would be barbarous,' was his answer to his remonstrating conscience, as
he marked the glow of her complexion at his approach, the tremor of her
hand at his pressure. 'I cannot, indeed, make her my wife. The woman
whom I marry, must assist in supporting the rank which she is to fill.
But Laura is not made for high life. Short commerce with the world would
destroy half her witchery. Love will compensate to us for every
privation. I will hide her and myself from a censorious world; she loves
solitude; and, with her, solitude will be delightful.'--He forgot that
solitude is delightful to the innocent alone.

Meantime, the artless Laura saw, in his highly-coloured pictures of
happy love, only scenes of domestic peace and literary leisure; and,
judging of his feelings by her own, dreamed not of ought that would have
disgraced the loves of angels. Tedious weeks of absence had intervened
since their last meeting; and Hargrave's resolution was taken. To live
without her was impossible; and he was determined to try whether he had
overrated the strength of her affection, when he ventured to hope that
to it she would sacrifice her all. To meet her thus unexpectedly filled
him with joy, and the heart of Laura throbbed quick as he expressed his
rapture. Never had his professions been so ardent; and, softened by
sorrow and by absence, never had Laura felt such seducing tenderness as
now stole upon her. Unable to speak, and unconscious of her path, she
listened with silent rapture to the glowing language of her lover, till
his entreaties wrung from her a reluctant confession of her preference.
Unmindful of the feeling of humiliation that makes the moment of such a
confession, of all others, the least favourable to a lover's boldness,
Hargrave poured forth the most vehement expressions of passion; while,
shrinking into herself, Laura now first observed, that the shades of
evening were closing fast, while their lonely path led through a wood
that climbed the rocky hill.--She stopped.--'I must return,' said she,
'my father will be anxious for me at this hour.'--'Talk not now of
returning,' cried Hargrave impetuously, 'trust yourself to a heart that
adores you. Reward all my lingering pains, and let this happy hour begin
a life of love and rapture.'--Laura, wholly unconscious of his meaning,
looked up in his face with an innocent smile. 'I have often taxed you
with raving,' said she, 'now, I am sure, you must admit the
charge.'--'Do not sport with me loveliest,' cried Hargrave, 'nor waste
these precious moments in cold delay. Leave forms to the frozen hearts
that wait them, and be from this hour mine, wholly and for ever.' Laura
threw a tearful glance on her mourning habit. 'Is this like bridal
attire?' said she: 'Would you bring your nuptial festivities into the
house of death, and mingle the sound of your marriage vow with my
mother's dying groans?' Can this simplicity be affected, thought
Hargrave. Is it that she will not understand me? He examined her
countenance. All there was candour and unsuspecting love. Her arm rested
on his with confiding pressure, and for a moment Hargrave faltered in
his purpose. The next, he imagined that he had gone too far to recede;
and pressing her to his breast with all the vehemence of passion, he, in
hurried half-articulate whispers, informed her of his real design. No
words can express her feelings, when, the veil thus rudely torn from her
eyes, she saw her pure, her magnanimous Hargrave--the god of her
idolatry, degraded to a sensualist--a seducer. Casting on him a look of
mingled horror, dismay, and anguish, she exclaimed, 'Are you so base?'
and freeing herself, with convulsive struggle, from his grasp, sunk
without sense or motion to the ground.

As he gazed on the death-pale face of Laura, and raised her lifeless
form from the earth, compassion, which so often survives principle,
overpowered all Hargrave's impetuous feelings; and they were succeeded
by the chill of horror, as the dreadful idea occurred to him, that she
was gone for ever. In vain he chafed her cold hands, tried to warm her
to life in his bosom, bared her's to the evening-breeze, and
distractedly called for help; while, with agony, which every moment
increased, he remembered, what so lately he had thought of with delight,
that no human help was near. No sign of returning life appeared. At last
he recollected that, in their walk, they had at some distance crossed a
little stream, and starting up with renovated hope, he ran to it with
the speed of lightning; but the way, which was so short as he passed it
before, now seemed lengthened without end. At last he reached it; and
filling his hat with water, returned with his utmost speed. He darted
forward till he found himself at the verge of the wood, and then
perceived that he had mistaken the path. As he retraced his steps, a
thousand times he cursed his precipitancy, and wished that he had more
cautiously ascertained the sentiments of his mistress, ere he permitted
his licentious purpose to be seen. After a search, prolonged by his own
frantic impatience, he arrived at the spot where he left her;--but no
Laura was there. He called wildly on her name--he was answered by the
mountain-echo alone. After seeking her long, a hope arose that she had
been able to reach the village; and thither he determined to return,
that, should his hope prove groundless, he might at least procure
assistance in his search.

As he approached the little garden that surrounded Captain Montreville's
cottage, he with joy perceived a light in the window of Laura's
apartment; and never, in the cheerfulest scenes, had he beheld her with
such delight as he did now, when every gesture seemed the expression of
unutterable anguish. He drew nearer, and saw despair painted on her
every feature; and he felt how tender was the love that could thus mourn
his degeneracy, and its own blighted hopes. If she could thus feel for
his guilt, the thought irresistibly pressed on his mind, with what
bitterness would she feel her own. Seduction, he perceived, would with
her be a work of time and difficulty; while, could he determine to make
her his wife, he was secure of her utmost gratitude and tenderness. The
known honour, too, of Captain Montreville made the seduction of his
daughter rather a dangerous exploit; and Colonel Hargrave knew, that, in
spite of the licence of the times, should he destroy the daughter's
honour, and the father's life, he would no longer be received, even in
the most fashionable circles, with the cordiality he could at present
command. The dignified beauty of Laura would grace a coronet, and more
than excuse the weakness which raised her to that distinction:--his wife
would be admired and followed, while all her affections would be his
alone. In fancy he presented her glittering with splendour, or majestic
in unborrowed loveliness, to his companions; saw the gaze of admiration
follow wherever she turned;--and that thought determined him. He would
go next morning, and in form commence honourable lover, by laying his
pretensions before Captain Montreville. Should Laura have acquainted her
father with the adventures of the evening, he might feel some little
awkwardness in his first visit; but she might perhaps have kept his
secret; and, at all events, his generous intentions would repair his
offence. Satisfied with himself, he retired to rest, and enjoyed a
repose that visited not the pillow of the innocent Laura.




CHAPTER II


Scarcely had Hargrave quitted Laura, when her senses began to return,
and with them an indefinite feeling of danger and alarm. The blood
gushing from her mouth and nostrils, she quickly revived to a full sense
of her situation, and instinctively endeavoured to quit a spot now so
dark and lonely. Terror gave her strength to proceed. Every path in her
native woods was familiar to her: she darted through them with what
speed she could command; and, reckless of all danger but that from which
she fled, she leapt from the projecting rocks, or gradually descended
from the more fearful declivities, by clinging to the trees which burst
from the fissures; till, exhausted with fatigue, she reached the valley,
and entered the garden that surrounded her home. Here, supported no
longer by the sense of danger, her spirits utterly failed her; and she
threw herself on the ground, without a wish but to die.

From this state she was aroused by the voice of her father, who, on the
outside of the fence, was inquiring of one of the villagers, whether she
had been seen. Wishing, she scarcely knew why, to escape all human eyes,
she rose, and, without meeting Captain Montreville, gained her own
apartment. As she closed her door, and felt for a moment the sense of
security, which everyone experiences in the chamber which he calls his
own,--'Oh!' cried she, 'that I could thus shut out the base world for
ever.'

There was in Laura's chamber one spot, which had, in her eyes, something
of holy, for it was hallowed by the regular devotions of her life. On
_it_ she had breathed her first infant prayer. _There_ shone on her the
eastern sun, as she offered her morning tribute of praise. _There_ first
fell the shades of evening that invited her to implore the protection of
her God. On that spot she had so often sought consolation, so often
found her chief delight, that it was associated in her mind with images
of hope and comfort; and springing towards it, she now almost
unconsciously dropped upon her knees. While she poured forth her soul in
prayer, her anguish softened into resignation; and with the bitter tears
of disappointment, those of gratitude mingled, while she thanked Him
who, though He had visited her with affliction, had preserved her from
guilt.

She rose, composed though wretched, resigned though hopeless; and, when
summoned to supper, had sufficient recollection to command her voice,
while she excused herself on the plea of a violent head-ache. Left to
herself, she passed the sleepless night, now in framing excuses for her
lover, now in tormenting reflections on her mistaken estimate of his
character; and in bitter regrets that what seemed so excellent should be
marred with so foul a stain. But Laura's thoughts were so habitually the
prelude to action, that, even in the severest conflict of her powers,
she was not likely to remain long in a state of ineffective meditation.
'What ought I _now_ to do,' was a question which, from childhood, Laura
had every hour habitually asked herself; and the irresistible force of
the habit of many years, brought the same question to her mind when she
rose with the dawn.

With a heavy heart, she was obliged to confess, that delicacy, no less
than prudence, must forbid all future intercourse with Hargrave. But he
had for some time been a constant visitor at the cottage, till excluded
by the increasing illness of Lady Harriet. He might now renew his
visits, and how was it possible to prevent this? Should she now refuse
to see him, her father must be made acquainted with the cause of such a
refusal, and she could not doubt that the consequences would be such as
she shuddered to think of. She groaned aloud as the horrid possibility
occurred to her, that her father might avenge her wrongs at the expense
of his virtue and his life--become for her sake a murderer, or fall by a
murderer's hand. She instantly resolved to conceal for ever the insult
she had received; and to this resolution she determined that all other
circumstances should bend. Yet should she receive Colonel Hargrave as
formerly, what might he not have the audacity to infer? How could she
make him fully sensible of her indignant feelings, yet act such a part
as might deceive the penetration of her father? Act a part!--deceive her
father! Laura's thoughts were usually clear and distinct; and there was
something in this distinct idea of evasions and deceit, that sickened
her very soul. This was the first system of concealment that had ever
darkened her fair and candid mind; and she wept bitterly when she
convinced herself, that from such conduct there was no escape.

She sat lost in these distressing reflections, till the clock struck the
hour of breakfast; then recollecting that she must not suffer her
appearance to betray her, she ran to her glass, and, with more interest
than she had perhaps ever before felt in the employment, proceeded to
dress her countenance to advantage. She bathed her swollen eyes, shaded
them with the natural ringlets of her dark hair, rubbed her wan cheeks
till their colour returned, and then entered the parlour with an
overacted gaiety that surprised Captain Montreville. 'I scarcely
expected,' said he, 'to see you so very animated, after being so ill as
to go to rest last night, for the first time in your life, without your
father's blessing.'

Laura, instantly sensible of her mistake, colouring, stammered something
of the cheering influence of the morning air; and then meditating on a
proper medium in her demeanour, sunk into so long a silence, as Captain
Montreville could not have failed to remark, had not his attention been
diverted by the arrival of the newspaper, which he continued to study
till breakfast was ended, when Laura gladly retired to her room.

Though the understanding of Laura was above her years, she had not
escaped a mistake common to the youth of both sexes, when smarting under
a recent disappointment in love,--the mistake of supposing, that all the
interest of life is, with respect to them, at an end, and that their
days must thenceforth bring only a dull routine of duties without
incitement, and of toils without hope. But the leading principle of
Laura's life was capable of giving usefulness, and almost
respectability, even to her errors; and the gloom of the wilderness,
through which her path seemed to lie, only brightened, by contrast, the
splendour that lay beyond. 'The world,' thought she, 'has now nothing to
offer that I covet, and little to threaten that I fear. What then
remains but to do my duty, unawed by its threatenings, unbribed by its
joys. Ere this cloud darkened all my earthly prospects, I was not
untaught, though I had too much forgotten the lesson, that it was not
for pastime I was sent hither. I am here as a soldier, who strives in an
enemy's land; as one who must run--must wrestle--must strain every
nerve--exert every power, nor once shrink from the struggle till the
prize is my own. Nor do I live for myself alone. I have a friend to
gratify--the poor to relieve--the sorrowful to console--a father's age
to comfort--a God to serve. And shall selfish feeling disincline me to
such duties as these? No, with more than seeming cheerfulness, I will
perform them all. I will thank Heaven for exempting me from the far
heavier task of honouring and obeying a profligate.'

A profligate! Must she apply such a name to Hargrave. The enthusiasm of
the moment expired at the word, and the glow of virtuous resolution
faded to the paleness of despondency and pain.

From a long and melancholy reverie, Laura was awakened by the sound of
the garden gate, and she perceived that it was entered by Colonel
Hargrave. Instinctively she was retreating from the window, when she saw
him joined by her father; and, trembling lest candour was about to
confess, or inadvertence to betray, what she so much wished to conceal,
she continued with breathless anxiety to watch their conference.

Though Colonel Hargrave was certainly one of the best bred men in the
kingdom, and, of consequence, entirely divested of the awkwardness of
_mauvaise honte_, it must be confessed, that he entered the presence of
the father of Laura with rather less than his accustomed ease; but the
cordial salutation of Captain Montreville banishing all fear that the
lady had been too communicative, our lover proceeded, without any
remaining embarrassment, to unfold the purpose of his visit. Nor could
any one have conjectured, from the courtly condescension of the great
man, that he conceived he was bestowing a benefit; nor from the manly
frankness of the other, that he considered himself as receiving a
favour. Not but that the Colonel was in full possession of the pleasures
of conscious generosity and condescension. So complete, indeed, was his
self-approbation, that he doubted not but his present magnanimous
resolve would efface from the mind of Laura all resentment for his
offence. Her displeasure he thought would be very short lived, if he
were able to convince her that his fault was not premeditated. This he
conceived to be an ample excuse, because he chose to consider the insult
he had offered, apart from the base propensities, the unbridled
selfishness which it indicated. As Laura had so well concealed his
indiscretion, he was too good a politician himself to expose it; and he
proceeded to make such offers in regard to settlements, as suited the
liberality of his character.

Captain Montreville listened with undisguised satisfaction to proposals
apparently so advantageous to his beloved child; but, while he
expressed his entire approbation of the Colonel's suit, regard to
feminine decorum made him add, 'that he was determined to put no
constraint on the inclinations of his daughter.' The Colonel felt a
strong conviction, that no constraint would be necessary: nevertheless,
turning a neat period, importing his willingness to resign his love,
rather than interfere with the happiness of Miss Montreville, he closed
the conference, by entreating that the Captain would give him an
immediate opportunity of learning his fate from the lips of the fair
Laura herself.

Laura had continued to follow them with her eyes, till they entered the
house together; and the next minute Captain Montreville knocked at her
door.

'If your head-ache is not quite gone,' said he, with a significant
smile, 'I will venture to recommend a physician. Colonel Hargrave is
waiting to prescribe for you; and you may repay him in kind, for he
tells me he has a case for your consideration.'

Laura was on the point of protesting against any communication with
Colonel Hargrave; but instantly recollecting the explanation that would
be necessary, 'I will go to him this instant,' she exclaimed with an
eagerness that astonished her father.

'Surely, you will first smooth these reddish locks of yours,' said he,
fondly stroaking his hand over her dark auburn hair. 'I fear so much
haste may make the Colonel vain.'

Laura coloured violently; for, amidst all her fears of a discovery, she
found place for a strong feeling of resentment, at the easy security of
forgiveness that seemed intimated by a visit so immediately succeeding
the offence. Having employed the few moments she passed at her toilette
in collecting her thoughts, she descended to the parlour, fully resolved
to give no countenance to the hopes her lover might have built on her
supposed weakness.

The Colonel was alone; and as she opened the door, eagerly advanced
towards her. 'My adored Laura,' cried he, 'this condescension--.' Had he
staid to read the pale, but resolute countenance of his 'adored' Laura,
he would have spared his thanks for her condescension.

She interrupted him. 'Colonel Hargrave,' said she, with imposing
seriousness, 'I have a request to make to you. Perhaps the peace of my
life depends upon your compliance.'

'Ah, Laura! what request can I refuse, where I have so much to ask?'

'Promise me, that you will never make known to my father--that you will
take every means to conceal from him the--,' she hesitated, 'the--our
meeting last night,' she added, rejoiced to have found a palliative
expression for her meaning.

'Oh! dearest Laura! forget it;--think of it no more.'

'Promise--promise solemnly. If indeed,' added she shuddering, while an
expression of anguish crossed her features, 'if indeed promises can
weigh with such a one as you.'

'For pity's sake, speak not such cutting words as those.'

'Colonel Hargrave, will you give me your promise?'

'I do promise--solemnly promise. Say, but that you forgive me.'

'I thank you, Sir, for so far ensuring the safety of my father, since he
might have risked his life to avenge the wrongs of his child. You cannot
be surprised, if I now wish to close our acquaintance, as speedily as
may be consistent with the concealment so unfortunately necessary.'

Impatient to conclude an interview which tasked her fortitude to the
utmost, Laura was about to retire. Hargrave seized her hand. 'Surely,
Laura, you will not leave me thus. You cannot refuse forgiveness to a
fault caused by intemperate passion alone. The only atonement in my
power, I now come to offer: my hand--my fortune--my future rank.'

The native spirit, and wounded delicacy of Laura, flashed from her eyes,
while she replied: 'I fear, Sir, I shall not be suitably grateful for
your generosity, while I recollect the alternative you would have
preferred.'

This was the first time that Laura had ever appeared to her lover, other
than the tender, the timid girl. From this character she seemed to have
started at once into the high-spirited, the dignified woman; and, with a
truly masculine passion for variety, Hargrave thought he had never seen
her half so fascinating. 'My angelic Laura,' cried he, as he knelt
before her, 'lovelier in your cruelty, suffer me to prove to you my
repentance--my reverence--my adoration;--suffer me to prove them to the
world, by uniting our fates for ever.'

'It is fit the guilty should kneel,' said Laura, turning away, 'but not
to their fellow mortals. Rise, Sir, this homage to me is but mockery.'

'Say, then, that you forgive me; say, that you will accept the
tenderness, the duty of my future life.'

'What! rather than control your passions, will you now stoop to receive
as your wife, her whom so lately you thought vile enough for the lowest
degradation? Impossible! yours I can never be. Our views, our
principles, are opposite as light and darkness. How shall I call heaven
to witness the prostitution of its own ordinances? How shall I ask the
blessing of my Maker, on my union with a being at enmity with him?'

'Good heavens, Laura, will you sacrifice to a punctilio--to a fit of
Calvinistic enthusiasm, the peace of my life, the peace of your own? You
have owned that you love me--I have seen it--delighted seen it a
thousand times--and will you now desert me for ever?'

'I do not act upon punctilio,' returned Laura calmly;--'I believe I am
no enthusiast. What _have_ been my sentiments, is now of no importance;
to unite myself with vice would be deliberate wickedness--to hope for
happiness from such an union would be desperate folly.'

'Dearest Laura, bound by your charms, allured by your example, my
reformation would be certain, my virtue secure.'

'Oh, hope it not!--Familiar with my form, my only hold on your regard,
you would neglect, forsake, despise me; and who should say that my
punishment was not just.'

'And will you then,' cried Hargrave, in an agony; 'Will you then cut me
off forever? Will you drive me for ever from your heart?'

'I have now no choice--leave me--forget me--seek some woman less
fastidious; or rather endeavour, by your virtues, to deserve one
superior far. Then honoured, beloved, as a husband, as a father'--The
fortitude of Laura failed before the picture of her fancy, and she was
unable to proceed. Determined to conceal her weakness from Hargrave, she
broke from him, and hurried towards the door;--but, melting into
tenderness at the thought that this interview was perhaps the last, she
turned. 'Oh, Hargrave,' she cried, clasping her hands as in
supplication, 'have pity on yourself--have pity on me--forsake the fatal
path on which you have entered, that, though for ever torn from you
here, I may yet meet you in a better world.'

She then darted from the room, leaving her lover in dumb amazement, at
the conclusion of an interview so different from his expectations. For
the resentment of Laura he had been prepared; but upon her determined
refusal, he had never calculated, and scarcely could he now admit the
reality. Could he give her credit for the professed motive of her
rejection? Colonel Hargrave had nothing in himself that made it natural
for him to suppose passion sacrificed to reason and principle. Had he
then deceived himself,--had she never really loved him?--the suggestion
was too mortifying to be admitted. Had resentment given rise to her
determination? She had spoken from the first with calmness,--at last
with tenderness. Was all this but a scene of coquetry, designed to
enhance her favours? The simple, the noble, the candid Laura guilty of
coquetry?--impossible! While these thoughts darted with confused
rapidity through his mind, one idea alone was distinct and
permanent--Laura had rejected him. This thought was torture. Strong
resentment mingled with his anguish; and to inflict, on the innocent
cause of it, pangs answering to those he felt, would have afforded to
Hargrave the highest gratification. Though his passion for Laura was the
most ardent of which he was capable, its effects, for the present, more
resembled those of the bitterest hatred. That she loved him, he would
not allow himself to doubt; and, therefore, he concluded that neglect
would inflict the surest, as well as the most painful wound. Swearing
that he would make her feel it at her heart's core, he left the cottage,
strode to the village inn, surlily ordered his horses, and, in a humour
compounded of revenge, impatient passion, and wounded pride, returned to
his quarters at ----. His scheme of revenge had all the success that
such schemes usually have or deserve; and while, for one whole week, he
deigned not, by visit or letter, to notice his mistress, the real
suffering which he inflicted, did not exactly fall on her for whom he
intended the pain.




CHAPTER III


To an interview which he presumed would be as delightful as interesting,
Captain Montreville chose to give no interruption; and therefore he had
walked out to superintend his hay-making: But, after staying abroad for
two hours, which he judged a reasonable length for a tête-à-tête, he
returned, and was a little surprised to find that the Colonel was gone.
Though he entertained not a doubt of the issue of the conference, he had
some curiosity to know the particulars, and summoned Laura to
communicate them.

'Well, my love,' said he, as the conscious Laura shut the parlour door,
'is Colonel Hargrave gone?'

'Long ago, Sir.'

'I thought he would have waited my return.'

Laura made no answer.

'When are we to see him again?'

Laura did not know.

'Well, well,' said Captain Montreville, a little impatiently, 'since the
Colonel is gone without talking to me, I must just hear from you what it
is you have both determined on.'

Laura trembled in every limb. 'I knew,' said she, without venturing to
lift her eye, 'that you would never sacrifice your child to rank or
fortune; and therefore I had no hesitation in refusing Colonel
Hargrave.'

Captain Montreville started back with astonishment,--'Refuse Colonel
Hargrave?' cried he,--'Impossible--you cannot be in earnest.'

Laura, with much truth, assured him that she never in her life had been
more serious.

Captain Montreville was thunderstruck. Surprise for a few moments kept
him silent. At last recovering himself,--'Why, Laura,' said he, 'what
objection could you possibly make to Hargrave?--he is young, handsome,
accomplished, and has shewn such generosity in his choice of you'--

'Generosity! Sir,' repeated Laura.

'Yes; it was generous in Colonel Hargrave, who might pretend to the
first woman in the kingdom, to think of offering to share his fortune
and his rank with you, who have neither.'

Laura's sentiments on this subject did not exactly coincide with her
father's, but she remained silent while he continued: 'I think I have a
right to hear your objections, for I am entirely at a loss to guess
them. I don't indeed know a fault Hargrave has, except perhaps a few
gallantries; which most girls of your age think a very pardonable
error.'

A sickness, as of death, seized Laura; but she answered steadily,
'Indeed, Sir, the Colonel's views are so different from mine--his
dispositions so very unlike--so opposite, that nothing but unhappiness
could possibly result from such an union. But,' added she, forcing a
languid smile, 'we shall, if you please, discuss all this to-morrow;
for, indeed, today, I am unable to defend my own case with you. I have
been indisposed all day.'

Captain Montreville looked at Laura, and, in the alarm which her unusual
paleness excited, lost all sense of the disappointment she had just
caused him. He threw his arm tenderly round her--supported her to her
own apartment--begged she would try to rest,--ran to seek a cordial for
his darling; and then, fearing that the dread of his displeasure should
add to her disorder, hastened back to assure her that, though her
happiness was his dearest concern, he never meant to interfere with her
judgment of the means by which it was to be promoted.

Tears of affectionate gratitude burst from the eyes of Laura. 'My dear
kind father,' she cried, 'let me love--let me please you--and I ask no
other earthly happiness.'

Captain Montreville then left her to rest; and, quite exhausted with
illness, fatigue, and sorrow, she slept soundly for many hours.

The Captain spent most of the evening ruminating on the occurrence of
the day; nor did his meditations at all diminish his surprize at his
daughter's unaccountable rejection of his favourite. He recollected many
instances in which he thought he had perceived her partiality to the
Colonel;--he perplexed himself in vain to reconcile them with her
present behaviour. He was compelled at last to defer his conclusions
till Laura herself should solve the difficulty. The subject was, indeed,
so vexatious to him, that he longed to have his curiosity satisfied, in
order finally to dismiss the affair from his mind.

Laura had long been accustomed, when assailed by any adverse
circumstance, whether more trivial or more important, to seize the first
opportunity of calmly considering how far she had herself contributed to
the disaster; and, as nothing is more hostile to good humour than an
ill-defined feeling of self-reproach, the habit was no less useful to
the regulation of our heroine's temper, than to her improvement in the
rarer virtues of prudence and candour. Her first waking hour, except
that which was uniformly dedicated to a more sacred purpose, she now
employed in strict and impartial self-examination. She endeavoured to
call to mind every part of her behaviour to Colonel Hargrave, lest her
own conduct might have seemed to countenance his presumption. But in
vain. She could not recall a word, a look, even a thought, that could
have encouraged his profligacy. 'Yet why should I wonder,' she
exclaimed, 'if he expected that temptation might seduce, or weakness
betray me, since he knew me fallible, and of the Power by which I am
upheld he thought not.'

Satisfied of the purity of her conduct, she next proceeded to examine
its prudence: but here she found little reason for self-congratulation.
Her conscience, indeed, completely acquitted her of levity or
forwardness, but its charges of imprudence she could not so easily
parry. Why had she admitted a preference for a man whose moral character
was so little known to her? Where slept her discretion, while she
suffered that preference to strengthen into passion? Why had she
indulged in dreams of ideal perfection? Why had she looked for
consistent virtue in a breast where she had not ascertained that piety
resided? Had she allowed herself time for consideration, would she have
forgotten that religion was the only foundation strong enough to support
the self-denying, the purifying virtues? These prudent reflections came,
in part, too late; for to love, Laura was persuaded she must henceforth
be a stranger. But to her friendships, she conceived, that they might be
applicable; and she determined to make them useful in her future
intercourse with her own sex; to whom, perhaps, they may be applied even
with more justice than to the other.

The mind of Laura had been early stored with just and rational
sentiments. These were the bullion--but it was necessary that
experience should give the stamp that was to make them current in the
ordinary business of life. Had she called prudence to her aid, in the
first stage of her acquaintance with the insinuating Hargrave, what
anguish would she not have spared herself. But if the higher wisdom is
to foresee and prevent misfortune, the next degree is to make the best
of it when unavoidable; and Laura resolved that this praise at least
should be her's. Fortified by this resolution, she quitted her
apartment, busied herself in her domestic affairs, met her father almost
with cheerfulness; and, when he renewed the subject of their last
conversation, repeated, with such composure, her conviction of the
dissimilarity of Hargrave's dispositions to her own, that Captain
Montreville began to believe that he had been mistaken in his opinion of
her preference. Still, however, he could not account for her rejection
of an offer so unobjectionable; and he hinted a suspicion, that some of
Hargrave's gallantries had been repeated to her, and perhaps with
exaggeration. With trembling lips, Laura assured him she had never heard
the slightest insinuation against Colonel Hargrave. Though Laura had
little of romance in her composition, her father now began to imagine,
that she allowed herself to cherish the romantic dream, that sympathy of
souls, and exactly concordant tastes and propensities, were necessary to
the happiness of wedded life. But Laura calmly declared, that her tastes
were not inflexible; and that, had she intended to marry, she should
have found it an easy duty to conform them to those of her husband: but
that the thought of marriage was shocking to her, and she trusted no man
would ever again think of her as a wife. Montreville, who for once
suspected his daughter of a little affectation, made no effort to combat
this unnatural antipathy, but trusted to time and nature for its cure.

As soon as her father left her, Laura, determined not to be brave by
halves, began the painful task of destroying every relic of Hargrave's
presence. She banished from her port-folio the designs he had made for
her drawings, destroyed the music from which he had accompanied her, and
effaced from her books the marks of his pencil. She had amused her
solitary hours by drawing, in chalks, a portrait of features indelibly
engraven on her recollection, and her fortitude failed her when about to
consign it to the flames.--'No;' she exclaimed, 'I can never part with
this. This, at least, I may love unreproved,' and she pressed it in
agony to her heart--inwardly vowing that no human being should fill its
place. But such thoughts as these could not linger in the reasonable
mind of Laura. The next moment she blushed for her weakness; and,
casting away its last treasure, averted her eyes till the flames had
consumed it to ashes. 'Now all is over,' she cried, as she threw herself
into a chair and burst into tears. But, quickly wiping them away, she
resolved that she would not wilfully bind herself to the rack of
recollection, and hastened to exert herself in some of her ordinary
employments.

Laura was aware that the cottage, where every walk, every shrub, every
flower spoke of Hargrave, was a scene unlikely to aid her purpose of
forgetting him; and, therefore, she that evening proposed to her father
that they should pay their long promised visit to Mrs Douglas. He
readily consented. Their journey was fixed for the following day, and
Laura occupied herself in preparing for their departure, though with
feelings far different from the delight with which, a few days before,
she would have anticipated a meeting with her early friend.




CHAPTER IV


Mrs Douglas observed, with satisfaction, the improved stature and
increasing gracefulness of her young favourite; but she remarked, with
painful interest, that the hectic of pleasure which tinged the cheek of
Laura, at their meeting, faded fast to the hue of almost sickly
delicacy. She soon noticed that an expression, as of sudden torture,
would sometimes contract, for a moment, the polished forehead of Laura;
that it was now succeeded by the smothered sigh, the compressed lip, the
hasty motion that spoke of strong mental effort, now subsided into the
languor of deep unconquered melancholy. Such depression Mrs Douglas
could not attribute to the loss of a mother, whose treatment furnished
more occasions of patience than of gratitude; and she anxiously longed
to discover its real cause. But it was soon evident that this was a
secret which Laura had no intention to disclose. A glance from the
inquiring eye of Mrs Douglas, at once recalled her to constrained
cheerfulness; and the presence of Captain Montreville seemed always to
put her entirely upon her guard. While he was in the room, she talked,
read aloud, or played with the children, as if determined to be amused;
but as soon as he retired, she relapsed, like one wearied with effort,
into languor and melancholy, till recalled to herself by the
scrutinizing looks of Mrs Douglas. Even in their most private
conversations, the name of Hargrave never passed her lips. Months,
indeed, had elapsed since Laura could have pronounced that name without
painful emotion--to utter it now was become almost impossible. She felt
that she had no right to publish, while she rejected, his addresses; and
she felt an invincible repugnance to expose even his failings, but much
more his vices, to the censure of the respectable Mrs Douglas. Soon
after she first saw Hargrave, she had written to her friend a warm
eulogium of his fine person, captivating manners, and elegant
accomplishments. Mrs Douglas, in reply, had desired to hear more of this
phoenix; but before Laura again found leisure to write, she was no
longer inclined to make Hargrave her subject, and her friend had
desisted from fruitless inquiries. Mrs Douglas had lately had an
opportunity of judging for herself of the Colonel's attractions; and, so
great did they appear to her, that it was with extreme astonishment she
heard his late disappointment from Captain Montreville, who did not feel
his daughter's delicacy on the subject. This communication only served
to increase her perplexity as to the cause of Laura's depression; yet
she felt herself relieved from the apprehension, that hopeless love for
Hargrave was wasting the health and peace of her dear Laura. Still,
however, she continued to watch that expressive countenance, to weigh
every word that might tend to unfold the enigma. In vain;--Laura
studiously avoided all approach to an explanation. Mrs Douglas's anxiety
now increased to a painful extreme. She felt how necessary to female
inexperience is the advice of a female,--how indispensable to feminine
sorrows are the consolations of feminine sympathy; and she resolved that
no false delicacy should withhold her from offering such relief as she
might have power to bestow.

One morning, after the gentlemen had left them alone together, Mrs
Douglas, meditating on the best means of introducing the subject she had
so much at heart, had fallen into a long silence; when, looking up, she
perceived that Laura had let fall her work, and was sitting with her
eyes fixed, and her arms dropped, in the attitude of one whose thoughts
had no connection with present objects. At the heavy sigh with which Mrs
Douglas surveyed her, she started, and was rousing her attention to some
indifferent subject, when Mrs Douglas, kindly taking her hand, said, 'My
dear child, whatever may be necessary with others, I beseech you to be
under no constraint with me. I am far from wishing to intrude into your
confidence, but do not add the pain of constraint to anguish that
already seems so oppressive.'

Large tears stole from under Laura's downcast eyelids; but she spoke
not. Mrs Douglas continued--'If my best advice, my most affectionate
sympathy, can be of use to you, I need not say you may command them.'

Laura threw herself into the arms of her friend, and for some moments
sobbed with uncontrolled emotion; but soon composing herself, she
replied: 'If advice could have profited, if consolation could have
reached me, where should I have sought them unless from you, respected
friend of my youth;--but the warning voice of wisdom comes now too late,
and even your sympathy would be bestowed in vain.'

'Heaven forbid that my dearest Laura should be beyond the reach of
comfort. That is the lot of guilt alone.'

'I am grateful to Heaven,' said Laura, 'that I have been less guilty
than imprudent. But, my best friend, let us quit this subject. This
wretchedness cannot, shall not last. Only let me implore you not to
notice it to my father. You know not what horrors might be the
consequence.'

Mrs Douglas shook her head. 'Ah! Laura,' said she, 'that path is not the
path of safety in which you would elude a father's eye.' Laura's glance
met that of her friend; and she read suspicion there. The thought was so
painful to her, that she was on the point of disclosing all; but she
remembered that the reasons which had at first determined her to
silence, were not altered by any one's suspicions, and she restrained
herself. Colonel Hargrave had cruelly wronged and insulted her--she
ought therefore to be doubly cautious how she injured him. Sympathy, in
her case, she felt, would be a dangerous indulgence; and, above all, she
shrunk with horror from exposing her lover, or his actions, to
detestation or contempt. 'Perhaps the time may come,' said she, pursuing
her reflections aloud, 'when you will be convinced that I am incapable
of any clandestine purpose. At present your compassion might be a
treacherous balm to me, when my best wisdom must be to forget that I
have need of pity.'

Mrs Douglas looked on the open candid countenance of Laura, and her
suspicions vanished in a moment; but they returned when her young friend
reiterated her intreaties that she would not hint the subject to her
father. Laura was, however, fortified in her resolutions of concealment,
by an opinion she had often heard Mrs Douglas express, that the feelings
of disappointed love should by women be kept inviolably a secret. She
was decisively giving a new turn to the conversation, when it was
interrupted by the entrance of the gentlemen; and Mrs Douglas, a little
hurt at the steadiness of her young friend, more than half determined to
renew the subject no more.

A letter lay on the table, which the post had brought for Captain
Montreville; he read it with visible uneasiness, and immediately left
the room. Laura perceived his emotion; and, ever alive to the painful
subject nearest her heart, instantly concluded that the letter brought a
confession from Hargrave. She heard her father's disordered steps pacing
the apartment above, and earnestly longed, yet feared to join him.
Anxiety at length prevailed; and she timidly approached the door of
Captain Montreville's chamber. She laid her hand upon the lock; paused
again, with failing courage, and was about to retire, when her father
opened the door. 'Come in, my love,' said he, 'I wish to speak with
you.' Laura, trembling, followed him into the room. 'I find,' said he,
'we must shorten our visit to our kind friends here, and travel
homewards, I must prepare,' continued he, and he sighed heavily, 'I must
prepare for a much longer journey.'

Laura's imagination took the alarm; and, forgetting how unlikely it was
that Captain Montreville should disclose such a resolution to her, she
thought only of his intending to prepare for a journey whence there is
no return, before he should stake his life against that of Hargrave. She
had not power to speak; but, laying her hand on her father's arm, she
cast on him a look of imploring agony. 'Do not be alarmed, my love,'
said he: 'I shall, in a few days, convey your commands to London; but I
do not mean to be long absent.'

Laura's heart leapt light. 'To London, Sir?' said she, in a tone of
cheerful inquiry.

'Yes, my dear child; I must go, and leave you alone at home--while yet I
have a home to shelter you. Had you resembled any other girl of your
age, I should have said no more of this--but I will have no concealments
from you. Read this letter.'

It was from Captain Montreville's agent, and briefly stated, that the
merchant in whose hands he had lately vested his all, in an annuity on
his daughter's life, was dead; and that, owing to some informality in
the deed, the heirs refused to make any payment. Having read the letter,
Laura continued for some moments to muse on its contents, with her eyes
vacantly fixed on the civil expression of concern with which it
concluded. 'How merciful it is,' she exclaimed, 'that this blow fell not
till my mother was insensible of the stroke.'

'For myself,' said Captain Montreville, 'I think I could have borne it
well; but this was the little independence I thought I had secured for
you, dear darling of my heart; and now'--The father's lip quivered, and
his eyes filled; but he turned aside, for he could _be_ tender--but
would not _seem_ so.

'Dearest father,' said Laura, 'think not of me. Could you have given me
millions, I should still have been dependent on the care of Providence,
even for my daily bread. My dependence will now only be a little more
perceptible. But perhaps,' added she cheerfully, 'something may be done
to repair this disaster, Warren's heirs will undoubtedly rectify this
mistake, when they find it has been merely accidental. At all events, a
journey to London will amuse you; and I shall manage your harvest so
actively in your absence.'

Captain Montreville had, from Laura's infancy, been accustomed to
witness instances of her fortitude, to see her firm under unmerited and
merciless chastisement, and patient under intense bodily suffering--but
her composure on this occasion, so far surpassed his expectations, that
he was inclined to attribute it less to fortitude than to
inconsideration. 'How light-hearted is youth,' thought he, as he quitted
her. 'This poor child has never seen the harsh features of poverty, but
when distance softened their deformity, and she now beholds his approach
without alarm.' He was mistaken. Laura had often taken a near survey of
poverty. She had entered the cabins of the very poor--seen infancy
squalid, and youth spiritless--manhood exhausted by toil, and age pining
without comfort. In fancy she had substituted herself in the place of
these victims of want; felt by sympathy their varieties of wretchedness;
and she justly considered poverty among the heaviest of human
calamities. But she was sensible that her firmness might support her
father's spirits, or her weakness serve to aggravate his distress; and
she wisely pushed aside the more formidable mischief, which she could
not surmount, to attend to the more immediate evil, which she felt it in
her power to alleviate.

The moment she was alone, Laura fell on her knees: 'Oh! Heavenly
Providence,' she cried, 'save, if it be thy will, my dear father's age
from poverty, though, like my great Master, I should not have where to
lay my head.' She continued to pray long and fervently, for spirits to
cheer her father under his misfortune; and for fortitude to endure her
own peculiar sorrow, in her estimation so much more bitter. Having
implored the blessing of Heaven on her exertions, she next began to
practice them. She wandered out to court the exhilarating influence of
the mountain air; and, studiously turning her attention to all that was
gay, sought to rouse her spirits for the task she had assigned them. She
was so successful, that she was that evening the life of the little
friendly circle. She talked, sang, and recited--she exerted all the wit
and vivacity of which she was mistress--she employed powers of humour
which she herself had scarcely been conscious of possessing. Her gaiety
soon became contagious. Scarcely a trace appeared of the anxious fears
of Mrs Douglas, or the parental uneasiness of Captain Montreville, and
fewer still of the death-stroke which disappointed confidence had
carried to the peace of poor Laura. But, retired to the solitude of her
chamber, her exhausted spirits found relief in tears. She felt, that
long to continue her exertion would be impossible; and, in spite of
reason, which told of the danger of solitude, anticipated, with
pleasure, the moment when total seclusion should leave her free to
undisguised wretchedness.

Laura was not yet, however, destined to the hopeless task of combating
misplaced affection in entire seclusion. On the following morning she
found a stranger at the breakfast-table. He seemed a man of information
and accomplishments. An enthusiast in landscape, he was come to
prosecute his favourite study amidst the picturesque magnificence of
Highland scenery; and the appearance and manners of a gentleman,
furnished him with a sufficient introduction to Highland hospitality.
Relieved, by his presence, from the task of entertaining, Laura scarcely
listened to the conversation, till the stranger, having risen from
table, began to examine a picture which occupied a distinguished place
in Mrs Douglas's parlour. It was the work of Laura, who was no mean
proficient. She had early discovered what is called a genius for
painting; that is to say, she had exercised much of her native
invention, and habitual industry on the art. Captain Montreville added
to his personal instructions, every facility which it was in his power
to bestow. Even when her performances had little in them of wonderful
but their number, her acquaintance pronounced them wonderful; and they
obtained the more useful approbation of a neighbouring nobleman, who
invited her to use, as copies, any part of his excellent collection. Her
progress was now, indeed, marvellous to those who were new to the
effects of unremitting industry, guided by models of exquisite skill.
Having long and sedulously copied, from pieces of acknowledged merit,
she next attempted an original; and having, with great care composed,
and with incredible labour finished her design, she dedicated to Mrs
Douglas the first fruits of her improved talents, in the picture which
the stranger was now contemplating. Willing that her young friend should
reap advantage from the criticisms of a judicious artist, Mrs Douglas
encouraged him to speak freely of the beauties and defects of the piece.
After remarking that there was some skill in the composition, much
interest in the principal figure, and considerable freedom in the
touch, he added: 'If this be, as I suppose, the work of a young artist,
I shall not be surprised that he one day rise both to fame and fortune.'

Mrs Douglas was about to direct his praise to its rightful owner, but
Laura silenced her by a look. The stranger's last expression had excited
an interest which no other earthly subject could have awakened. Her
labours might, it appeared, relieve the wants or increase the comforts
of her father's age; and, with a face that glowed with enthusiasm, and
eyes that sparkled with renovated hope, she eagerly advanced to question
the critic as to the value of her work. In reply, he named a price so
far exceeding her expectations, that her resolution was formed in a
moment. She would accompany her father to London, and there try what
pecuniary advantage was to be derived from her talent. On a scheme which
was to repair all her father's losses, prudence had not time to pause;
and, feeling company rather a restraint on her pleasure, Laura ran to
her apartment, rather to enjoy than to reconsider her plan. Having spent
some time in delighted anticipation of the pleasure which her father
would take in the new team and thrashing-mill with which she would adorn
his farm, and the comfort he would enjoy in the new books and easy sofa
with which her labours would furnish his library, she recollected a
hundred questions that she wished to ask the stranger, concerning the
best means of disposing of her future productions, and she ran down
stairs to renew the conversation--but the parlour was empty, the
stranger was gone. No matter. No trifle could at this moment have
discomposed Laura; and, with steps as light as a heart from which, for a
time, all selfish griefs were banished, she crossed the little lawn in
search of her father.

The moment she overtook him, locking her arm in his, and looking
smilingly up in his face, she began so urgent an entreaty to be admitted
as the companion of his journey, that Captain Montreville, with some
curiosity, inquired what had excited in her this sudden inclination to
travel? Laura blushed and hesitated; for though her plan had, in her own
opinion, all the charms which we usually attribute to the new born
children of our fancy, she felt that an air of more prudence and
forethought might be requisite to render it equally attractive in the
eyes of Captain Montreville. She exerted, however, all the rhetoric she
could at that moment command, to give her scheme a plausible appearance.
With respect to herself, she was entirely successful; and she ventured
to cast a look of triumphant appeal on her father. Captain Montreville,
unwilling to refuse the request of his darling, remained silent; but at
the detail of her plan, he shook his head. Now, to a projector of
eighteen, a shake of the head is, of all gestures, the most offensive;
and the smile which usually accompanies it, miserably perverts the
office of a smile. Tears, half of sorrow, half of vexation, forced their
way to the eyes of Laura; and she walked silently on, without courage to
renew the attack, till they were joined by Mrs Douglas. Disconcerted by
her ill success with her father, Laura felt little inclination to
subject her scheme to the animadversions of her friend; but Captain
Montreville, expecting an auxiliary, by whose aid he might conquer the
weakness of yielding without conviction, called upon Mrs Douglas, in a
manner which shewed him secure of her reply, to give her opinion of
Laura's proposal. Mrs Douglas, who had heard, with a degree of horror,
of the intention to consign Laura to solitude in her present state of
suppressed dejection, and who considered new scenes and new interests as
indispensable to her restoration, interpreting the asking looks of the
fair petitioner, surprised Captain Montreville by a decided verdict in
her favour. Rapturously thanking her advocate, Laura now renewed her
intreaties with such warmth, that her father, not possessed of that
facility in refusing which results from practice, gave a half-reluctant
acquiescence. The delight which his consent conveyed to Laura, which
sparkled in her expressive features, and animated her artless gestures,
converted his half-extorted assent into cordial concurrence; for to the
defects of any scheme that gave her pleasure, he was habitually blind.

In the course of the evening, Captain Montreville announced that, in
order to give his daughter time to prepare for her journey, it would be
necessary for them to return to Glenalbert on the following morning.

While Mrs Douglas was assisting Laura to pack up her little wardrobe,
she attempted to break her guarded silence on the subject of Hargrave,
by saying, 'I doubt this same journey of your's will prevent Colonel
Hargrave from trying the effects of perseverance, which I used to think
the most infallible resort in love, as well as in more serious
undertakings.' Laura began a most diligent search for something upon the
carpet. 'Poor Hargrave,' Mrs Douglas resumed, 'he is a great favourite
of mine. I wish he had been more successful.' Laura continued
industriously cramming a bandbox. 'All these gowns and petticoats will
crush your new bonnet to pieces, my dear.' Laura suddenly desisted from
her employment, rose, and turning full towards Mrs Douglas, said--'It is
unkind, it is cruel, thus to urge me, when you know that duty more than
inclination keeps me silent.' 'Pardon me, my dear Laura,' said Mrs
Douglas, 'I have no wish to persecute you; but you know I was ignorant
that Colonel Hargrave was our interdicted subject.'

She then entered on another topic; and Laura, vexed at the partial
disclosure she had inadvertently made, uneasy at being the object of
constant scrutiny, and hurt at being obliged to thwart the habitual
openness of her temper, felt less sorry than relieved as she sprung into
the carriage that was to convey her to Glenalbert. So true is it, that
concealment is the bane of friendship.

Other interests, too, quickened her desire to return home. She longed,
with a feeling which could not be called hope, though it far exceeded
curiosity, to know whether Hargrave had called or written during her
absence; and the moment the chaise stopped, she flew to the table where
the letters were deposited to wait their return. There were none for
her. She interrupted Nanny's expression of joy at the sight of her
mistress, by asking who had called while they were from home. 'Nobody
but Miss Willis.' Laura's eyes filled with tears of bitterness. 'I am
easily relinquished,' thought she--'but it is better that it should be
so;' and she dashed away the drops as they rose.

She would fain have vented her feelings in the solitude of her chamber;
but this was her father's first return to a widowed home, and she would
not leave him to its loneliness. She entered the parlour. Captain
Montreville was already there; and, cheerfully welcoming him home, she
shook up the cushion of an elbow-chair by the fire-side, and invited him
to sit. 'No, love,' said he, gently compelling her, 'do you take that
seat; it was your mother's.' Laura saw his lip quiver, and, suppressing
the sob that swelled her bosom, she tenderly withdrew him from the room,
led him to the garden, invited his attention to her new-blown
carnations, and gradually diverted his regard to such cheerful objects,
that, had Captain Montreville examined what was passing in his own mind,
he must have confessed that he felt the loss of Lady Harriet less as a
companion than an antagonist. She was more a customary something which
it was unpleasant to miss from its place, than a real want which no
substitute could supply. Laura's conversation, on the contrary, amusing
without effort, ingenious without constraint, and rational without
stiffness, furnished to her father a real and constant source of
enjoyment; because, wholly exempt from all desire to shine, she had
leisure to direct to the more practicable art of pleasing, those efforts
by which so many others vainly attempt to dazzle.




CHAPTER V


The three following days Laura employed in making arrangements for her
journey. Desirous to enliven the solitude in which she was about to
leave her only attendant, she consigned the care of the cottage, during
her absence, to the girl's mother, who was likewise her own nurse; and
cautious of leaving to the temptations of idleness, one for whose
conduct she felt herself in some sort accountable, she allotted to Nanny
the task of making winter clothing for some of the poorest inhabitants
of Glenalbert; a task which her journey prevented her from executing
herself. Nor were the materials of this little charity subtracted from
her father's scanty income, but deducted from comforts exclusively her
own.

Though, in the bustle of preparation, scarcely a moment remained
unoccupied, Laura could not always forbear from starting at the sound of
the knocker, or following with her eyes the form of a horseman winding
through the trees. In vain she looked--in vain she listened. The
expected stranger came not--the expected voice was unheard. She tried to
rejoice at the desertion: 'I am glad of it,' she would say to herself,
while bitter tears were bursting from her eyes. She often reproached
herself with the severity of her language at her last interview with
Hargrave. She asked herself what right she had to embitter
disappointment by unkindness, or to avenge insult by disdain. Her
behaviour appeared to her, in the retrospect, ungentle, unfeminine,
unchristian. Yet she did not for a moment repent her rejection, nor
waver for a moment in her resolution to adhere to it. Her soul sickened
at the thought, that she had been the object of licentious passion
merely; and she loathed to look upon her own lovely form, while she
thought that it had seduced the senses, but failed to touch the soul of
Hargrave.

Amidst these employments and feelings the week had closed; and the
Sabbath evening was the last which Laura was to spend at Glenalbert.
That evening had long been her chosen season of meditation, the village
church-yard the scene where she loved to 'go forth to meditate.' The way
which led to it, and to it alone, was a shady green lane, gay with
veronica and hare-bell, undefaced by wheels, but marked in the middle
with one distinct track, and impressed towards the sides with several
straggling half-formed footpaths. The church itself stood detached from
the village, on a little knoll, on the west side of which the
burial-ground sloped towards the woody bank that bounded a brawling
mountain stream. Thither Laura stole, when the sun, which had been hid
by the rugged hill, again rolling forth from behind the precipitous
ascent, poured through the long dale his rays upon this rustic cemetery;
the only spot in the valley sufficiently elevated to catch his parting
beam.

'How long, how deep is the shadow--how glorious in brightness the
reverse,' said she, as she seated herself under the shade of the newly
raised grave-stone that marked the place of her mother's rest; and
turning her mind's eye from what seemed a world of darkness, she raised
it to scenes of everlasting light. Her fancy, as it soared to regions of
bliss without alloy, looked back with something like disgust on the
labours that were to prepare her for their enjoyment, and a feeling
almost of disappointment and impatience accompanied the recollection,
that her pilgrimage was to all appearance only beginning. But she
checked the feeling as it rose, and, in penitence and resignation,
raised her eyes to heaven. They rested as they fell upon a stone marked
with the name and years of one who died in early youth. Laura remembered
her well--she was the beauty of Glenalbert; but her lover left her for a
richer bride, and her proud spirit sunk beneath the stroke. The village
artist had depicted her want of resignation in a rude sculpture of the
prophet's lamentation over his withered gourd. 'My gourd, too, is
withered,' said Laura. 'Do I well to be angry even unto death? Will the
giver of all good leave me even here without comfort? Shall I refuse to
find pleasure in any duties but such as are of my own selection: Because
the gratification of one passion--one misplaced passion, is refused, has
this world no more to offer? this fair world, which its great Creator
has stamped with his power, and stored by his bounty, and ennobled by
making it the temple of his worshippers, the avenue to heaven! Shall I
find no balm in the consolations of friendship, the endearments of
parental love--no joy in the sweets of benevolence, the stores of
knowledge, the miracles of grace! Oh! may I ever fearlessly confide in
the fatherly care, that snatched me from the precipice from which my
rash confidence was about to plunge me to my ruin--that opened my eyes
on my danger ere retreat was impossible.'

The reflections of Laura were disturbed by the noise of some one
springing over the fence; and, the next moment, Hargrave was at her
side. Laura uttered neither shriek nor exclamation--but she turned; and,
with steps as precipitate as would bear the name of walking, proceeded
towards the gate. Hargrave followed her. 'Am I indeed so happy as to
find you alone?' said he. Laura replied not, by word or look. 'Suffer me
to detain you for a few moments.' Laura rather quickened her pace. 'Will
you not speak to me Miss Montreville?' said Hargrave, in a tone of
tender reproach. Laura continued to advance. 'Stay but one moment,' said
he, in a voice of supplication. Laura laid her hand upon the gate.
Hargrave's patience was exhausted. 'By heaven you _shall_ hear me!' he
cried, and, throwing his arm round her, compelled her to be seated on
the stone-bench at the gate. Laura coldly withdrew herself. 'By what
right, Sir,' said she, 'do you presume to detain me?' 'By the right of
wretchedness--of misery not to be endured. Since I last saw you, I have
never known rest or peace. Surely, Laura, you are now sufficiently
avenged--surely your stubborn pride may now condescend to hear
me.'--'Well, Sir,' said Laura, without attempting to depart; 'what are
your commands?' 'Oh, Laura, I cannot bear your displeasure--it makes me
supremely miserable. If you have any pity, grant me your forgiveness.'
'If my forgiveness is of any value to you, I give it you, I trust, like
a Christian--from the heart. Now, then, suffer me to go.'

'What--think you it is the frozen forgiveness of duty that will content
me? Torn, as I am, by every passion that can drive man to frenzy, think
you that I will accept--that I will endure this heartless, scornful
pardon? Laura, you loved me once. I have doated on you--pined for
you--and passion--passion only--will I accept, or bear from you.'

Laura shrunk trembling from his violence. 'Colonel Hargrave,' said she,
'if you do not restrain this vehemence, I must, I will be gone. I would
fain spare you unnecessary pain; but while you thus agitate yourself, my
stay is useless to you, and to me most distressing.' 'Say, then, that
you accept my vows--that, hopeless of happiness but with me, you bind
yourself to me alone, and for ever. Speak, heavenly creature, and bless
me beyond the fairest dreams of hope!'

'Colonel Hargrave,' said Laura, 'you have my forgiveness. My--what shall
I say--my esteem you have cast from you--my best wishes for your
happiness shall ever be yours--more I cannot give. In pity to yourself,
then--in pity to me--renounce one who can never be yours.'

Hargrave's eyes flashed fire, while his countenance faded to ghastly
paleness. 'Yes;' he exclaimed, 'cold, pitiless, insensible woman--yes I
renounce you. In the haunts of riot, in the roar of intemperance, will I
forget that form, that voice--and, when I am lost to fame, to health, to
usefulness--my ruin be on your soul.' 'Oh! Hargrave,' cried the
trembling Laura, 'talk not so wildly; Heaven will hear my prayers for
you.--Amidst the pursuits of wisdom--amidst the attractions of others,
you will forget me.'

'Forget you! Never. While I have life, I will follow
you--supplicate--persecute you.--Mine you shall be, though infamy and
death ensue. Dare not,' said he, grasping her arm,--'dare not to seek
the protection of another.--Dare but to give him one smile, and his life
shall be the forfeit.'

'Alas! Alas!' cried Laura, wringing her hands in anguish, 'this is real
frenzy. Compose yourself, I implore you--there is no other--there never
can be'--

Her tears recalled Hargrave to something like composure. 'Dearest
Laura,' said he, 'I wish to soften--I only terrify you. Fear not,
beloved of my soul--speak to me without alarm. I will hear you, if it be
possible, with calmness--but say not, oh! say not, that you reject me!'
Laura averted her face. 'Why prolong this distressing interview,' said
she,--'You have heard my determination. I know that it is right, and I
cannot relinquish it.'

The triumph of self-conquest gave firmness to her voice; and Hargrave,
driven again from composure by her self-command, sprang from her side.
'It is well, Madam,' he cried; 'triumph in the destruction of my peace;
but think not I will so tamely resign you. No; by Heaven. I will go this
moment to your father--I will tell him my offence; and ask if he thinks
it deserves such punishment. Let him take my life--I abhor it.'

'Is your promise, then, of such small avail?' said Laura, sternly.

'Shall a promise bind me to a life of wretchedness? Shall I regard the
feelings of one who takes an inhuman pleasure in my sufferings?' At this
moment Laura's eyes fell on her father, who was entering the little
avenue. Hargrave's glance followed hers, and he prepared to join Captain
Montreville. In an agony of terror, Laura grasped his arm. 'Spare me,
spare me,' she said, 'and do with me what you will!' Captain Montreville
saw that the walk was occupied; he turned from it, and Laura had again
time to breathe. 'Say, then,' said Hargrave, softened by her
emotion,--'say that, when years of penitence have atoned my offence, you
will yet be mine.' Laura covered her face with her hands. 'Let me not
hear you--let me not look upon you,' said Laura;--'leave me to think, if
it be possible,'--and she poured a silent prayer to Heaven for help in
this her sorest trial. The effort composed her, and the majesty of
virtue gave dignity to her form, and firmness to her voice, while she
said,--'My father's life is in the hands of Providence--it will still be
so, when I have repeated to you, that I dare not trust to principles
such as yours the guardianship of this the infancy of my being. I dare
not incur certain guilt to escape contingent evil. I cannot make you the
companion of this uncertain life, while your conduct is such, as to make
our eternal separation the object of my dreadful hope.'

Hargrave had trusted that the tenderness of Laura would seduce, or his
ardour overpower her firmness; but he read the expression of her pale
determined countenance, and felt assured that she was lost to him
forever. Convinced that all appeal to her feelings would be hopeless, he
would deign to make none; but in a voice made almost inarticulate by the
struggle of pride and anguish, he said,--'Miss Montreville, your
father's life is safe from me--I will not lift my hand against it. That
he should take mine is of small importance, either to you or myself. A
violent death,' continued he, his pale lip quivering with a smile of
bitterness,--'may perhaps procure me your tardy pity.'

From the storm of passion, Laura had shrunk with terror and dismay; but
the voice of suppressed anguish struck her to the soul. 'Oh! Hargrave,'
she cried, with tears no longer to be restrained, 'you have my tenderest
pity--would to Heaven that the purity of your future life would restore
me to the happiness of esteeming you!'

Laura's tenderness revived, in a moment, the hopes of Hargrave. 'Angel
of sweetness,' he exclaimed, 'mould me to your will--say that, when
purified by years of repentance, you will again bless me with your love;
and no exertion will be too severe--no virtue too arduous.'

'No; this I dare not promise; let a higher motive influence you; for it
is not merely the conduct--it is the heart that must have changed, ere I
durst expose my feeble virtue to the trial of your example--your
authority; ere I durst make it my duty to shut my eyes against your
faults, or to see them with the indulgence of love.'

'Dearest Laura, one word from you will lure me back to the path of
virtue--will you wilfully destroy even the wish to return. If for a
year--for two years--my conduct should bear the strictest scrutiny--will
you not accept this as a proof that my heart is changed--changed in
every thing but its love for you--will you not then receive me?'

Laura had resisted entreaty--had withstood alarm--had conquered strong
affection; but the hope of rousing Hargrave to the views, the pursuits,
the habits of a Christian, betrayed her caution, and gladdened her heart
to rapture. 'If for two years,' said she, her youthful countenance
brightening with delight, 'your conduct is such as you describe--if it
will bear the inspection of the wise, of the sober-minded, of the
pious,--as my father's friend, as my own friend, will I welcome you.'

Thus suddenly raised from despair, Hargrave seemed at the summit of
felicity. Once admitted as her 'father's friend, as her own,' he was
secure of the accomplishment of his wishes. The time that must first
elapse, appeared to him but a moment; and the labours of duty required
of him seemed a smiling dream. Love and joy animated every feature of
his fine countenance; he threw himself at the feet of Laura, and
rapturously blessed her for her condescension. His extasies first made
her sensible of the extent of her concession; and she feared that she
had gone too far. But with her, a promise, however inadvertent, was a
sacred thing, which she would neither qualify nor retract. She contented
herself, therefore, with merely repeating the terms of it, emphatically
guarding the conditions. Desirous now to have leisure for reflection,
she reminded him that the lateness of the hour made it fit that he
should depart; and, inwardly persuaded that she would not long
obdurately refuse him another interview, he obeyed without much
opposition.




CHAPTER VI


The lovers were no sooner parted, than Hargrave began to repent that he
had not more distinctly ascertained the kind and manner of the
intercourse which he was to hold with his mistress during the term of
his probation; and though he had little fear that she would be very
rigid, he considered this as a point of such importance, that he
resolved not to quit Glenalbert without having the matter settled to his
satisfaction. For this reason he condescended to accept the
accommodations of the little straw-roofed cottage, by courtesy called
the Inn, where he had already left his horse; and thither he retired
accordingly, not without some national misgivings of mind on the subject
of Scotish nastiness and its consequences. His apartment, however,
though small, was decent, his bed was clean, his sleep refreshing, and
his dreams pleasant; nor was it till a late hour the following morning,
that he rose to the homely comfort, and clumsy abundance of a Highland
breakfast. As soon as he had finished his repast, he walked towards
Montreville's cottage, ostensibly to pay his respects to the Captain,
but, in reality, with the hope of obtaining a private interview with
Laura. He entered the garden, where he expected to find Captain
Montreville. It was empty. He approached the house. The shutters were
barred. He knocked at the door, which was opened by the old woman; and,
on inquiring for Captain Montreville, he was answered, 'Wow, Sir, him
an' Miss Laura's awa' at six o'clock this morning.' 'Away,' repeated the
Colonel,--'Where are they gone?' 'To London, Sir; and I'm sure a lanely
time we'll hae till they come hame again.' 'What stay do they intend
making?' 'Hech, Sir, I dare say that's what they dinna ken themsels.'
'What is their address?' inquired the Colonel. 'What's your will, Sir:'
'Where are they to be found?' 'Am'n I tellan you they're in London, Sir.
I'm sure ye ken whar that is?' 'But how are you to send their letters?'
'Wow! they never got mony letters but frae England; and now 'at they're
in London, ye ken the folk may gie them into their ain hand.' 'But
suppose you should have occasion to write to them yourself?' said
Hargrave, whose small stock of patience wore fast to a close. 'Hech,
Sir, sorrow a scrape can I write. They learn a' thae newfangled things
now; but, trouth, i' my young days, we were na' sae upsettan.' Hargrave
was in no humour to canvas the merits of the different modes of
education; and, muttering an ejaculation, in which the word _devil_ was
distinctly audible, he turned away.

Vexed and disappointed, he wandered down the churchyard-lane, and
reached the spot where he had last seen Laura. He threw himself on the
seat that had supported her graceful form--called to mind her consummate
loveliness--her ill-repressed tenderness--and most cordially consigned
himself to Satan for neglecting to wring from her some further
concessions. She was now removed from the solitude where he had reigned
without a rival. Her's would be the gaze of every eye--her's the command
of every heart. 'She may soon choose among numbers,' cried he,--'she
will meet with people of her own humour, and some canting hypocritical
scoundrel will drive me completely from her mind.' By the time he had
uttered this prediction, and bit his lip half through--he was some steps
on his way to order his horses, that he might pursue his fair fugitive,
in the hope of extorting from her some less equivocal kind of promise.
Fortunately for his reputation for sanity, however, he recollected,
before he began his pursuit, that, ere he could overtake her, Laura must
have reached Edinburgh, where, without a direction, it might be
difficult to discover her abode. In this dilemma, he was again obliged
to have recourse to the old woman at the cottage; but she could give him
no information. She neither knew how long Captain Montreville purposed
remaining in Edinburgh, nor in what part of the town he intended to
reside.

Thus baffled in his inquiries, Hargrave was convinced that his pursuit
must be ineffectual; and, in no very placid frame of mind, he changed
his destination from Edinburgh to his quarters. He arrived there in time
for a late dinner, but his wine was insipid, his companions tiresome;
and he retired early, that, early next morning, he might set out on a
visit to Mrs Douglas, from whom he purposed to learn Captain
Montreville's address.

On comparing the suppressed melancholy of Laura, her embarrassment at
the mention of Hargrave, and her inadvertent disclosure, with her
father's detail of her rejection of the insinuating young soldier, a
suspicion not very remote from truth, had entered the mind of Mrs
Douglas. She imagined that Captain Montreville had in some way been
deceived as to the kind of proposals made to his daughter; and that
Laura had rejected no offers but such as it would have been infamy to
accept. Under this conviction, it is not surprising that her reception
of the Colonel was far from being cordial; nor that, guessing his
correspondence to be rather intended for the young lady than for the old
gentleman, she chose to afford no facility to an intercourse which she
considered as both dangerous and degrading. To Hargrave's questions,
therefore, she answered, that until she should hear from London, she was
ignorant of Captain Montreville's address; and that the time of his
return was utterly unknown to her. When the Colonel, with the same
intention, soon after repeated his visit, she quietly, but steadily,
evaded all his inquiries, equally unmoved by his entreaties, and the
paroxysms of impatience with which he endured his disappointment.

Hargrave was the only child of a widow--an easy, indolent, good sort of
woman, who would gladly have seen him become every thing that man ought
to be, provided she could have accomplished this laudable desire without
recourse to such harsh instruments as contradiction and restraint. But
of these she disliked the use, as much as her son did the endurance: and
thus the young gentleman was educated, or rather grew up, without the
slightest acquaintance of either. Of consequence, his naturally warm
temper became violent, and his constitutionally strong passions
ungovernable.

Hargrave was the undoubted heir of a title, and of a fine estate. Of
money he had never felt the want, and did not know the value; he was,
therefore, so far as money was concerned, generous even to profusion.
His abilities were naturally of the highest order. To force him to the
improvement of them, was an effort above the power of Mrs Hargrave; but,
fortunately for him, ere his habits of mental inaction were
irremediable, a tedious illness confined him to recreations in which
mind had some share, however small. During the interdiction of bats and
balls, he, by accident, stumbled on a volume of Peregrine Pickle, which
he devoured with great eagerness; and his mother, delighted with what
she was pleased to call a _turn for reading_, took care that this new
appetite should not, any more than the old ones, pine for want of
gratification. To direct it to food wholesome and invigorating, would
have required unremitting though gentle labour: and to labour of all
kinds Mrs Hargrave had a practical antipathy. But it was very easy to
supply the young man with romances, poetry, and plays; and it was
pleasing to mistake their intoxicating effect for the bursts of mental
vigour. A taste for works of fiction, once firmly established, never
after yielded to the attractions of sober truth; and, though his
knowledge of history was neither accurate nor extensive, Hargrave could
boast of an intimate acquaintance with all the plays, with almost all
the poetry, and as far as it is attainable by human diligence, with all
the myriads of romances in his mother tongue. He had chosen, of his own
free-will, to study the art of playing on the flute; the violin
requiring more patience than he had to bestow; and emulation, which
failed to incite him to more useful pursuits, induced him to try whether
he could not draw as well as his play-fellow, De Courcy. At the age of
seventeen he had entered the army. As he was of good family, of an
elegant figure, and furnished by nature with one of the finest
countenances she ever formed, his company was courted in the highest
circles, and to the ladies he was particularly acceptable. Among such
associates, his manners acquired a high polish; and he improved in what
is called knowledge of the world; that is, a facility of discovering,
and a dexterity in managing the weaknesses of others. One year--one
tedious year, his regiment had been quartered in the neighbourhood of
the retirement where the afore-said De Courcy was improving his 'few
paternal acres;' and, partly by his persuasion and example, partly from
having little else to do, partly because it was the fashionable science
of the day, Hargrave had prosecuted the study of chemistry. Thus have we
detailed, and in some measure accounted for, the whole of Colonel
Hargrave's accomplishments, excepting only, perhaps, the one in which he
most excelled--he danced inimitably. For the rest, he had what is called
a good heart; that is, he disliked to witness or inflict pain, except
from some incitement stronger than advantage to the sufferer. His fine
eyes had been seen to fill with tears at a tale of _elegant_ distress;
he could even compassionate the more vulgar sorrows of cold and hunger
to the extent of relieving them, provided always that the relief cost
nothing but money. Some casual instances of his feeling, and of his
charity, had fallen under the observation of Laura; and upon these, upon
the fascination of his manners, and the expression of his countenance,
her fervid imagination had grafted every virtue that can exalt or adorn
humanity. Gentle reader, excuse the delusion. Laura was only
seventeen--Hargrave was the first handsome man of fashion she had ever
known, the first who had ever poured into her ear the soothing voice of
love.

Unprepared to find, in an obscure village in Scotland, the most perfect
model of dignified loveliness, Hargrave became the sudden captive of her
charms; and her manner, so void of all design,--the energy--the
sometimes wild poetic grace of her language--the shrewdness with which
she detected, and the simplicity with which she unveiled, the latent
motives of action, whether in herself or in others, struck him with all
the force of contrast, as he compared them with the moulded artificial
standard of the day. His interest in her was the strongest he had ever
felt, even before it was heightened by a reserve that came too late to
repress or conceal the tenderness with which she repaid his passion. Yet
Hargrave was not less insensible to the real charms of Laura's mind,
than she was unconscious of the defects in his. Her benevolence pleased
him; for bright eyes look brighter through tears of sympathy, and no
smile is so lovely as that which shines on the joys of others. Her
modesty charmed him; for every voluptuary can tell what allurements
blushes add to beauty. But of her self-denial and humility he made no
account. Her piety, never obtruded on his notice, had at first escaped
his observation altogether; and, now that it thwarted his favourite
pursuit, he considered it merely as a troublesome prejudice. Of all her
valuable qualities, her unfailing sweetness of temper was perhaps the
only one that he valued for its own sake. But her person he idolized. To
obtain her no exertion would have appeared too formidable; and,
remembering the conditions of their future reconciliation, he began, for
the first time in his life, to consider his conduct with a view to its
moral fitness.

This he found a subject of inextricable difficulty. He was ignorant of
the standard by which Laura would judge him. He was willing to believe
that, if she were left to herself, it would not be severe; but the words
of her promise seemed to imply, that his conduct was to be subjected to
the scrutiny of less partial censors, and he felt some anxiety to know
who were to be his 'wise,' 'sober-minded,' 'pious' inspectors. He did
not game, his expences did not much exceed his income, therefore he
could imagine no change in his deportment necessary to conciliate the
'wise.' Though, under the name of sociality, he indulged freely in wine,
he seldom exceeded to intoxication. Here again reform seemed needless.
But, that he might give no offence to the 'sober-minded,' he intended to
conduct his indispensable gallantries with great discretion, he
determined to refrain from all approach to seduction, and magnanimously
resolved to abstain from the molestation of innocent country-girls and
decent maid-servants. Finally, to secure the favour of the 'pious,' he
forthwith made a purchase of Blair's sermons, and resolved to be seen in
Church once at least every Sunday.

It might be supposed, that when the scale of duty which we trace is low,
we should be more likely to reach the little eminence at which we
aspire; but experience shews us, that they who poorly circumscribe the
Christian race, stop as much short of their humble design, as does he of
his nobler purpose, whose glorious goal is perfection. The sequel will
show the attainments of Colonel Hargrave in the ways of virtue. In the
meantime his magnet of attraction to Perthshire was gone; he soon began
to grow weary of the feeling of restraint, occasioned by supposing
himself the subject of a system of _espionage_; and to kill the time,
and relieve himself from his imaginary shackles, he sought the
assistance of the Edinburgh races; determined, that if Laura prolonged
her stay in London, he would obtain leave of absence, and seek her
there.




CHAPTER VII


The grey lights of morning shone mild on Glenalbert, as the carriage,
which was conveying Laura to scenes unknown, wound slowly up the hill.
With watery eyes she looked back on the quiet beauties of her native
valley. She listened to the dashing of its stream, till the murmur died
on her ear. Her lowly home soon glided behind the woods; but its early
smoke rose peaceful from amidst its sheltering oaks, till it blended
with the mists of morning; and Laura gazed on it as on the parting steps
of a friend. 'Oh, vales!' she exclaimed, 'where my childhood
sported--mountains that have echoed to my songs of praise, amidst your
shades may my age find shelter--may your wild-flowers bloom on my
grave!'--Captain Montreville pressed the fair enthusiast to his breast
and smiled. It was a smile of pity--for Montreville's days of enthusiasm
were past. It was a smile of pleasure--for we love to look upon the
transcript of our early feelings. But, whatever it expressed, it was
discord with the tone of Laura's mind. It struck cold on her glowing
heart; and she carefully avoided uttering a word that might call forth
such another, till, bright gleaming in the setting sun, she first beheld
romantic Edinburgh. 'Is it not glorious!' she cried, tears of wonder and
delight glittering in her eyes, and she longed for its re-appearance,
when the descent of the little eminence which had favoured their view,
excluded the city from their sight.

As the travellers approached the town, Laura, whose attention was
rivetted by the castle and its rocks, now frowning majestic in the
shades of twilight, and by the antique piles that seemed the work of
giants, scarcely bestowed a glance on the neat row of modern buildings
along which she was passing, and she was sorry when the carriage turned
from the objects of her admiration towards the hotel where Captain
Montreville intended to lodge.

Next morning, Laura, eager to renew the pleasure of the evening,
proposed a walk; not without some dread of encountering the crowd which
she expected to find in such a city. Of this crowd, she had, indeed,
seen nothing the night before; but she concluded, ere that she reached
town, most of the inhabitants had soberly retired to rest. At the season
of the year, however, when Laura reached Edinburgh, she had little cause
for apprehension. The noble streets through which she passed had the
appearance of being depopulated by pestilence. The houses were
uninhabited, the window-shutters were closed, and the grass grew from
the crevices of the pavement. The few well-dressed people whom she saw,
stared upon her with such oppressive curiosity, as gave the uninitiated
Laura a serious uneasiness. At first she thought that some peculiarity
in her dress occasioned this embarrassing scrutiny. But her dress was
simple mourning, and its form the least conspicuous possible. She next
imagined, that to her rather unusual stature she owed this unenviable
notice; and, with a little displeasure, she remarked to her father, that
it argued a strange want of delicacy to appear to notice the
peculiarities of any one's figure; and that, in this respect, the upper
ranks seemed more destitute of politeness than their inferiors. Captain
Montreville answered, with a smile, that he did not think it was her
height which drew such attention. 'Well,' said she, with great
simplicity, 'I must endeavour to find food for my vanity in this notice,
though it is rather against my doing so, that the women stare more
tremendously than the gentlemen.'

As they passed the magnificent shops, the windows, gay with every
variety of colour, constantly attracted Laura's inexperienced eye; and
she asked Montreville to accompany her into one where she wished to
purchase some necessary trifle. The shopman observing her attention
fixed on a box of artificial flowers, spread them before her; and tried
to invite her to purchase, by extolling the cheapness and beauty of his
goods. 'Here is a charming sprig of myrtle, ma'am; and here is a
geranium-wreath, the most becoming thing for the hair--only seven
shillings each, ma'am.' Laura owned the flowers were beautiful. 'But I
fear,' said she, looking compassionately at the man, 'you will never be
able to sell them all. There are so few people who would give seven
shillings for what is of no use whatever.' 'I am really sorry for that
poor young man,' said she to her father, when they left the shop. 'Tall,
robust, in the very flower of his age, how he must feel humbled by
being obliged to attend to such trumpery?' 'Why is your pity confined to
him?' said Montreville. 'There were several others in the same
situation.' 'Oh! but they were children, and may do something better by
and by. But the tall one, I suppose, is the son of some weak mother, who
fears to trust him to fight his country's battles. It is hard that she
should have power to compel him to such degradation; I really felt for
him when he twirled those flowers between his finger and thumb, and
looked so much in earnest about nothing.' The next thing which drew
Laura's attention was a stay-maker's sign. 'Do the gentlemen here wear
corsets?' said she to Montreville. 'Not many of them, I believe,' said
Montreville. 'What makes you inquire?' 'Because there is a _man_
opposite who makes corsets. It cannot surely be for women.'

Captain Montreville had only one female acquaintance in Edinburgh, a
lady of some fashion, and hearing that she was come to town to remain
till after the races, he that forenoon carried Laura to wait upon her.
The lady received them most graciously, inquired how long they intended
to stay in Edinburgh; and on being answered that they were to leave it
in two days, overwhelmed them with regrets, that the shortness of their
stay precluded her from the pleasure of their company for a longer
visit. Laura regretted it too; but utterly ignorant of the time which
must elapse between a fashionable invitation and the consequent visit,
she could not help wondering whether the lady was really engaged for
each of the four daily meals of two succeeding days.

These days, Captain Montreville and his daughter passed in examining
this picturesque city--its public libraries, its antique castle, its
forsaken palace, and its splendid scenery. But nothing in its singular
environs more charmed the eye of Laura than one deserted walk, where,
though the noise of multitudes stole softened on the ear, scarcely a
trace of human existence was visible, except the ruin of a little chapel
which peeped fancifully from the ledge of a rock, and reminded her of
the antick gambols of the red deer on her native hills, when, from the
brink of the precipice, they look fearless into the dell below. Captain
Montreville next conducted his daughter to the top of the fantastic
mountain that adorns the immediate neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and
triumphantly demanded whether she had ever seen such a prospect. But
Laura was by no means disposed to let Perthshire yield the palm to
Lowland scenery. Here indeed, the prospect was varied and extensive, but
the objects were too various, too distant, too gay--they glared on the
eye--the interest was lost. The serpentine corn-ridges, offensive to
agricultural skill; the school, with its well frequented Gean-tree; the
bright green clover fields, seen at intervals through the oak coppice;
the church, half hid by its venerable ash trees; the feathery birch,
trembling in the breath of evening; the smoking hamlet, its soft colours
blending with those of the rocks that sheltered it; the rill, dashing
with fairy anger in the channel which its winter fury had
furrowed--these were the simple objects which had charms for Laura, not
to be rivalled by neat enclosures and whitened villas. Yet the scenes
before her were delightful, and had not Captain Montreville's appeal
recalled the comparison, she would, in the pleasure which they excited,
have forgotten the less splendid beauties of Glenalbert.

Montreville pointed out the road that led to England. Laura sent a
longing look towards it, as it wound amid woods and villages and gentle
swells, and was lost to the eye in a country which smiled rich and
inviting from afar. She turned her eyes where the Forth is lost in the
boundless ocean, and sighed as she thought of the perils and hardships
of them who go down to the sea in ships. Montreville, unwilling to
subject her to the inconveniencies of a voyage, had proposed to continue
his journey by land, and Laura herself could not think without
reluctance of tempting the faithless deep. The scenery, too, which a
journey promised to present, glowed in her fervid imagination with more
than nature's beauty. Yet feeling the necessity of rigid economy, and
determined not to permit her too indulgent parent to consult her
accommodation at the expence of his prudence, she it was, who persuaded
Montreville to prefer a passage by sea, as the mode of conveyance best
suited to his finances.

The next day our travellers embarked for London. The weather was fine,
and Laura remained all day upon deck, amused with the novelty of her
situation. Till she left her native solitude, she had never even seen
the sea, except, when from a mountain top, it seemed far off to mingle
with the sky; and to her, the majestic Forth, as it widened into an
estuary, seemed itself a 'world of waters.' But when on one side the
land receded from the view, when the great deep lay before her, Laura
looked upon it for a moment, and shuddering, turned away. 'It is too
mournful,' said she to her father--'were there but one spot, however
small, however dimly descried, which fancy might people with beings like
ourselves, I could look with pleasure on the gulf between--but here
there is no resting place. Thus dismal, thus overpowering, methinks
eternity would have appeared, had not a haven of rest been made known to
us.' Compared with the boundless expanse of waters, the little bark in
which she was floating seemed 'diminished to a point;' and Laura raising
her eyes to the stars that were beginning to glimmer through the
twilight, thought that such a speck was the wide world itself, amid the
immeasurable space in which it rolled. This was Laura's hour of prayer,
and far less inviting circumstances can recal us to the acts of a
settled habit.

Five days they glided smoothly along the coast. On the morning of the
sixth, they entered the river, and the same evening reached London.
Laura listened with something like dismay, to the mingled discord that
now burst upon her ear. The thundering of loaded carriages, the wild
cries of the sailors, the strange dialect, the ferocious oaths of the
populace, seemed but parts of the deafening tumult. When they were
seated in the coach which was to convey them from the quay, Laura begged
her father to prevail on the driver to wait till the unusual concourse
of carts and sledges should pass, and heard with astonishment that the
delay would be in vain. At last they arrived at the inn where Captain
Montreville intended to remain till he could find lodgings; and, to
Laura's great surprise, they completed their journey without being
jostled by any carriages, or overturned by any waggoner--for ought she
knew, without running over any children.

Being shown into a front parlour, Laura seated herself at a window, to
contemplate the busy multitudes that thronged the streets; and she could
not help contrasting their number and appearance with those of the
inhabitants of Edinburgh. There the loitering step, the gay attire, the
vacant look, or the inquisitive glance, told that mere amusement was the
object of their walk, if indeed it had an object. Here, every face was
full of business--none stared, none sauntered, or had indeed the power
to saunter, the double tide carrying them resistlessly along in one
direction or the other. Among all the varieties of feature that passed
before her, Laura saw not one familiar countenance; and she
involuntarily pressed closer to her father, while she thought, that
among these myriads she should, but for him, be alone.

Captain Montreville easily found an abode suited to his humble
circumstances; and, the day after his arrival, he removed with his
daughter to the second floor above a shop in Holborn. The landlady was
a widow, a decent orderly-looking person; the apartments, though far
from elegant, were clean and commodious. They consisted of a parlour,
two bedchambers, and a small room, or rather closet, which Laura
immediately appropriated as her painting-room. Here she found amusement
in arranging the materials of her art, while Captain Montreville walked
to the west end of the town, to confer with his agent on the unfortunate
cause of his visit to London. He was absent for some hours; and Laura,
utterly ignorant of the length of his walk, and of its difficulties for
one who had not seen the metropolis for twenty years, began to be uneasy
at his stay. He returned at last, fatigued and dispirited, without
having seen Mr Baynard, who was indisposed, and could not admit him.
After a silent dinner, he threw himself upon a sofa, and dismissed his
daughter, saying that he felt inclined to sleep. Laura took this
opportunity to write to Mrs Douglas a particular account of her travels.
She mentioned with affectionate interest some of her few acquaintances
at Glenalbert, and inquired for all the individuals of Mrs Douglas's
family; but the name of Hargrave did not once occur in her letter,
though nothing could exceed her curiosity to know how the Colonel had
borne her departure, of which, afraid of his vehemence, she had, at
their last interview, purposely avoided to inform him.

Having finished her letter, Laura, that she might not appear to repress
civility, availed herself of her landlady's invitation to 'come now and
then,' as she expressed it, 'to have a chat;' and descended to the
parlour below. On perceiving that Mrs Dawkins was busily arranging the
tea equipage, with an air that showed she expected company, Laura would
have retreated, but her hostess would not suffer her to go. 'No, no,
Miss,' said she, 'I expects nobody but my daughter Kate, as is married
to Mr Jones the haberdasher; and you mustn't go, for she can tell you
all about Scotland; and it is but natural to think that you'd like to
hear about your own country, now when you're in a foreign land, as a
body may say.'

The good woman had judged well in the bribe she offered to her guest,
who immediately consented to join her party; and who, perceiving that
Mrs Dawkins was industriously spreading innumerable slices of bread and
butter, courteously offered to share her toils. Mrs Dawkins thanked her,
and accepted her services, adding, 'indeed it's very hard as I should
have all them here things to do myself, when I have a grown up daughter
in the house. But, poor thing, it a'n't her fault after all, for she
never was larnt to do nothing of use.' 'That was very unfortunate,'
said Laura. 'Yes, but it might'nt have been so misfortunate neither,
only, you see, I'll tell you how it was. My sister, Mrs Smith, had a
matter of £10,000 left her by her husband, and so she took a fancy when
July was born as she'd have her called a grand name; and I'm sure an
unlucky name it was for her; for many a fine freak it has put into her
head. Well, and so as I was saying, she took July home to herself, and
had her larnt to paint, and to make fillagree, and play on the piano,
and what not; and to be sure we thought she would never do less than
provide for her. But what do you think, why, two year's ago, she ran
away with a young ensign, as had nothing in the varsal world but his
pay; and so July came home just as she went; and what was worst of all,
she could'nt do no more in the shop nor the day she was born.'

'That was hard, indeed,' said Laura.

'Wasn't it now,--but one comfort was, I had Kate brought up in another
guess-way; for I larnt her plain work and writing, and how to cast
accounts; and never let her touch a book, except the prayer-book
a-Sundays; and see what's the upshot on't. Why, though July's all to
nothing the prettiest, nobody has never made an offer for she, and
Kate's got married to a warm man as any in his line hereabouts, and a
man as has a house not ten doors off; and besides, as snug a box in the
country as ever you seed,--so convenient you've no idear. Why, I dare
say, there's a matter of ten stage-coaches pass by the door every day.'

To all this family history, Laura listened with great patience,
wondering, however, what could induce the narrator to take so much
trouble for the information of a stranger.

The conversation, if it deserves the name, was now interrupted by the
entrance of a young woman, whom Mrs Dawkins introduced as her daughter
July. Her figure was short, inclining to embonpoint--her face, though
rather pretty, round and rosy,--and her whole appearance seemed the
antipodes of sentiment. She had, however, a book in her hand, on which,
after exchanging compliments with Laura, she cast a languishing look,
and said, 'I have been paying a watery tribute to the sorrows of my fair
name-sake.' Then pointing out the title-page to Laura, she added, 'You,
I suppose, have often done so.'

It was the tragedy of THE MINISTER, and Laura, reading the name aloud,
said, she was not acquainted with it.

'Oh,' cried Mrs Dawkins, 'that's the young woman as swears so horridly.
No, I dares to say, Miss Montreville never read no such thing. If it
an't a shame to be seen in a Christian woman hands, it is. And if she
would read it by herself, it would be nothing; but there she goes,
ranting about the house like an actress, cursing all aloud, worser nor
the drunken apple-woman at the corner of the street.'

'Pray Mamma, forbear,' said Miss Julia Dawkins, in a plaintive tone; 'it
wounds my feelings to hear you. I am sure, if Miss Montreville would
read this play, she would own that the expressions which you austerely
denominate curses, give irresistible energy to the language.'

'This kind of energy,' said Laura, with a smile, 'has at least the merit
of being very generally attainable.' This remark was not in Miss Julia's
line. She had, therefore, recourse to her book, and with great variety
of grimace, read aloud one of Casimir's impassioned, or, as Laura
thought, frantic speeches. The curious contrast of the reader's manner,
with her appearance, of the affected sentimentality of her air, with the
robust vulgarity of her figure, struck Laura as so irresistibly
ludicrous, that, though of all young ladies, she was the least addicted
to tittering, her politeness would have been fairly defeated in the
struggle, had it not been reinforced by the entrance of Mr and Mrs
Jones. The former was a little man, in a snuff-coloured coat, and a
brown wig, who seemed to be about fifty,--the latter was a good-humoured
commonplace looking woman, of about half that age. Laura was pleased
with the cordiality with which Mr Jones shook his mother-in-law by the
hand, saying, 'Well, Mother, I's brought you Kate pure and hearty again,
and the little fellow is fine and well, tho'f he be too young to come a
wisiting.'

As soon as the commotion occasioned by their entrance was over, and
Laura formally made acquainted with the lady, Mrs Dawkins began, 'I
hopes, Kate, you ha'nt forgot how to tell about your jaunt to Scotland;
for this here young lady staid tea just o'purpose to hear it.' 'Oh, that
I ha'nt,' said Mrs Jones, 'I'm sure I shall remember it the longest day
I have to live.' 'Pray Miss,' added she, turning to Laura, 'was you ever
in Glasgow?' 'Never,' said Laura; 'but I have heard that it is a fine
city.' 'Ay, but I've been there first and last eleven days; and I can
say for it, it is really a handsome town, and a mort of good white-stone
houses in it. For you see, when Mr Jones married me, he had not been
altogether satisfied with his rider, and he thoft as he'd go down to
Glasgow himself and do business; and that he'd make it do for his
wedding jaunt, and that would be killing two dogs with one stone.'
'That was certainly an excellent plan,' said Laura. 'Well,' continued
Mrs Jones, 'when we'd been about a week in Glasgow, we were had to dine
one day with Mr Mactavish, as supplies Mr Jones with ginghams; and he
talked about some grand house of one of your Scotch dukes, and said as
how we must'nt go home without seeing it. So we thought since we had
come so far, we might as well see what was to be seen.' 'Certainly,'
said Laura, at the pause which was made to take breath, and receive
approbation. 'Well, we went down along the river, which, to say truth,
is very pretty, tho'f it be not turfed, nor kept neat round the edges,
to a place they call Dumbarton; where there is a rock, for all the
world, like an ill-made sugar loaf, with a slice out o' the middle on't;
and they told us there was a castle on it, but such a castle!' 'Pray,
sister,' said Miss Julia, 'have you an accurate idea of what constitutes
a castle? of the keeps, the turrets, the winding staircases, and the
portcullis?' 'Bless you, my dear,' returned the traveller, 'ha'nt I seen
Windsor Castle, and t'other's no more like it--no more than nothing at
all. Howsoever, we slept that night at a very decent sort of an inn; and
Mr Jones thought as we were so comfortable, we had best come back to
sleep. So as the duke's house was but thirty miles off, we thought if we
set off soon in the morning, we might get back at night. So off we set,
and went two stages to breakfast, at a place with one of their
outlandish names; and to be sartain, when we got there, we were as
hungry as hounds. Well, we called for hot rolls; and, do but think,
there was'nt no such thing to be had for love or money.'

Mrs Jones paused to give Laura time for the expression of pity; but she
remained silent, and Mrs Jones resumed: 'Well, they brought us a loaf as
old as St Paul's, and some good enough butter; so thinks I, I'll make us
some good warm toast; for I loves to make the best of a bad bargain. So
I bid the waiter bring us the toast-stool; but if you had seen how he
stared,--why, the pore fellor had never heard of no such thing in his
life. Then they shewed us a huge mountain, as black as a sootbag, just
opposite the window, and said as we must go up there; but, thinks I,
catch us at that; for if we be so bad off here for breakfast, what shall
we be there for dinner. So my husband and I were of a mind upon it, to
get back to Glasgow as fast as we could; for, though to be sure it cost
us a power of money coming down, yet, thinks we, the first loss is the
best.'

'What would I have given,' cried Miss Julia, turning up the whites of
her eyes, 'to have been permitted to mingle my sighs with the mountain
breezes!' Mrs Jones was accustomed to her sister's nonsense, and she
only shrugged her shoulders. But Mrs Dawkins, provoked that her daughter
should be so much more than usually ridiculous before a stranger, said,
'Why, child, how can you be so silly,--what in the world should you do
sighing o' top of a Scotch hill? I dare to say, if you were there you
might sigh long enough before you'd find such a comfortable cup of tea,
as what you have in your hand.' Miss Julia disdained reply; but turning
to our heroine, she addressed her in a tone so amusingly sentimental,
that Laura feared to listen to the purport of her speech, lest the
manner and the matter united should prove too much for her gravity; and
rising, she apologized for retiring, by saying, that she heard her
father stir, and that she must attend him.

When two people of very different ages meet tête à tête in a room, where
they are not thoroughly domesticated,--where there are no books, no
musical instruments, nor even that grand bond of sociality, a fire,--it
requires no common invention and vivacity to pass an evening with
tolerable cheerfulness. The little appearances of discomfort, however,
which imperceptibly lower the spirits of others, had generally an
opposite effect upon those of Laura. Attentive to the comfort of every
human being who approached her, she was always the first to discover the
existence and cause of the 'petty miseries of life;'--but, accustomed to
consider them merely as calls to exertion, they made not the slightest
impression on her spirits or temper. The moment she cast her eyes on her
father, leaning on a table, where stood a pair of candles, that but
half-lighted the room; and on the chimney, where faded fennel occupied
the place of a fire, she perceived that all her efforts would be
necessary to produce any thing like comfort. She began her operations,
by enticing her father out of the large vacant room, into the small one,
where she intended to work. Here she prepared his coffee, gave him
account of the party below stairs, read to him her letter to Mrs
Douglas, and did and said every thing she could imagine to amuse him.

When the efforts to entertain are entirely on one side, it is scarcely
in human nature to continue them; and Laura was beginning to feel very
blank, when it luckily occurred to her, that she had brought her little
chess-board from Glenalbert. Away she flew, and in triumph produced this
infallible resort. The match was pretty equal. Captain Montreville had
more skill, Laura more resource; and she defended herself long and
keenly. At last she was within a move of being checkmated. But the move
was hers; and the Captain, in the heat of victory, overlooked a step by
which the fortune of the game would have been reversed. Laura saw it,
and eagerly extended her hand to the piece; but recollecting that there
is something in the pride of man's nature that abhors to be beaten at
chess by a lady, she suddenly desisted; and, sweeping her lily arm
across the board, 'Nay, now,' she cried, with a look of ineffable good
nature, 'if you were to complete my defeat after all my hair-breadth
'scapes, you could not be so unreasonable as to expect that I should
keep my temper.' 'And how dare you,' said Captain Montreville, in great
good humour with his supposed victory, 'deprive me at once of the
pleasures of novelty and of triumph?' By the help of this auxiliary, the
evening passed pleasantly away; and, before another came, Laura had
provided for it the cheap luxury of some books from a circulating
library.




CHAPTER VIII


For the first fortnight after Captain Montreville's arrival in London,
almost every forenoon was spent in unavailing attempts to see Mr
Baynard, whose illness, at the end of that time, had increased to such a
degree, as left no hope that he could soon be in a condition for
attending to business. Harassed by suspense, and weary of waiting for an
interview which seemed every day more distant, Captain Montreville
resolved to stay no longer for his agent's introduction to Mr Warren,
but to visit the young heir, and himself explain his errand. Having
procured Mr Warren's address from Mr Baynard's servants, he proceeded to
Portland Street; and knocking at the door of a handsome house, was there
informed that Mr Warren was gone to Brighton, and was not expected to
return for three weeks.

Captain Montreville had now no resource but to unfold his demands to Mr
Warren in writing. He did so, stating his claims with all the simple
energy of truth; but no answer was returned. He fatigued himself and
Laura in vain, with conjecturing the cause of this silence. He feared
that, though dictated by scrupulous politeness, his letter might have
given offence. He imagined that it might have miscarried, or that Mr
Warren might have left Brighton before it reached him. All his
conjectures were, however, wide of the truth. The letter had given no
offence, for it had never been read. It safely reached the person to
whom it was addressed, just as he was adding a finishing touch to the
graces of a huge silk handkerchief in which he had enveloped his chin,
preparatory to the exhibition of his person, and of an elegant new
curricle upon the Steine. A single glance had convinced him that the
letter was unworthy to encroach on this momentous concern--he had thrown
it aside, intending to read it when he had nothing else to do, and had
seen it no more, till on his return to London, he unrolled from it his
bottle of esprit de rose, which his valet had wrapped in its folds.

The three wearisome weeks came to an end at last, as well as a fourth,
which the attractions of Brighton prevailed on Mr Warren to add to his
stay; and Captain Montreville, making another, almost hopeless, inquiry
in Portland Street, was, to his great joy, admitted to the long desired
conference. He found the young man in his nightgown, reclining on a
sofa, intently studious of the _Sportsman's Magazine_, while he ever and
anon refreshed himself for this his literary toil, by sipping a cup of
chocolate. Being courteously invited to partake, the Captain began by
apologizing for his intrusion, but pleaded that his business was of such
a nature as to require a personal interview. At the mention of business,
the smile forsook its prescriptive station on the smooth face of Mr
Warren. 'Oh pray pardon me, Sir,' said he, 'my agent manages all my
matters--I never meddle with business--I have really no head for it.
Here, Du Moulin, give this gentleman Mr William's address.' 'Excuse me,
Sir,' said Captain Montreville. 'On this occasion I must entreat that
you will so far depart from your rule as to permit me to state my
business to you in person.' 'I assure you, Sir,' said the beau rising
from his luxurious posture, 'I know nothing about business--the very
name of it is to me the greatest bore in life;--it always reminds me of
my old dead uncle. The poor man could never talk of any thing but of
bank-stock, the price of the best archangel tar, and the scarcity of
hemp. Often did I wish the hemp had been cheap enough to make him apply
a little of it to his own use--but the old cock took wing at last
without a halter, he, he, he.'

'I shall endeavour to avoid these offensive subjects,' said Captain
Montreville, smiling. 'The affair in which I wish to interest you, is
less a case of law than of equity, and therefore I must beg permission
to state it to your personal attention, as your agent might not think
himself at liberty to do me the justice which I may expect from you.'

Mr Warren at this moment recollected an indispensable engagement, and
begged that Captain Montreville would do him the favour to call another
time--secretly resolving not to admit him. 'I shall not detain you two
minutes,' said the Captain; 'I shall in a few words state my request,
and leave you to decide upon it when you are more at leisure.' 'Well,
Sir,' replied Mr Warren, with something between a sigh and an
ill-suppressed yawn, 'if it must be so.'--

'About eighteen months ago,' resumed the Captain, 'my agent, Mr
Baynard, paid £1500 to your late uncle, as the price of an annuity on my
daughter's life. The deed is now found to be informal, and Mr Williams
has refused to make any payment. Mr Baynard's disposition has prevented
me from seeing him since my arrival in London; but I have no doubt that
he can produce a discharge for the price of the annuity; in which case,
I presume you will allow the mistake in the deed to be rectified.'

'Certainly, certainly,' said Mr Warren, who had transferred his thoughts
from the subject of the conversation to the comparative merits of
nankeen pantaloons and leather-breeches. 'But even if Mr Baynard should
have no document to produce,' continued Captain Montreville, 'may I not
hope that you will instruct Mr Williams to examine, whether there are
not in Mr Warren's books, traces of the agreement for an annuity of £80,
in the name of Laura Montreville?' 'Sir?' said Warren, whose ear caught
the tone of interrogation, though the meaning of the speaker had
entirely escaped him. The Captain repeated his request. 'Oh, certainly I
will,' said the young man, who would have promised any thing to get rid
of the subject. 'I hope the matter will be found to stand as you wish.
At all events, such a trifling sum can be of no sort of consequence.'
'Pardon me, Sir,' said Captain Montreville, warmly, 'to me it is of the
greatest--should this trifle, as you are pleased to call it, be lost to
me, my child must at my death be left to all the horrors, all the
temptations of want--temptations aggravated a thousand fold, by beauty
and inexperience.' His last words awakened something like interest in
the drowsy soul of his hearer, who said, with the returning smile of
self-complacency, 'Beauty, Sir, did you say? beauty is what I may call
my passion--a pretty girl is always sure of my sympathy and good
offices. I shall call for Mr Williams this very day.' Captain
Montreville bit his lip. 'Laura Montreville,' thought he, 'an object of
sympathy to such a thing as thou!' He bowed, however, and, said, 'I
hope, Sir, you will find, upon examination, that Miss Montreville's
claims rest upon your justice.' Then laying his address upon the table,
he took his leave, with an air perhaps a little too stately for one who
had come to ask a favour.

He returned home, however, much pleased with having at last met with
Warren, and with having, as he imagined, put in train the business on
account of which he had performed so long a journey, and suffered so
much uneasiness. He found Laura, too, in high spirits. She had just
given the finishing touches to a picture on which she had been most
busily employed ever since her arrival in London. She had studied the
composition, till her head ached with intensity of thought. She had
laboured the finishing with care unspeakable; and she now only waited
till her work could with safety be moved, to try the success of her
project for the attainment of wealth. Of this success she scarcely
entertained a doubt. She was sensible, indeed, that the picture had many
faults, but not so many as that on which Mrs Douglas's visitor had fixed
so high a price. Since painting the latter, she had improved in skill;
and never had she bestowed such pains as on her present work. The
stranger had said that the Scipio in Mrs Douglas's picture was
interesting. The Leonidas in this was much more so--she could not doubt
it, for he resembled Hargrave. She had hoped the resemblance would be
apparent to no eye but her own. Her father, however, had noticed it, and
Laura had tried to alter the head, but the Captain declared she had
spoiled it. Laura thought so herself; and, after sketching a hundred
regularly handsome countenances, could be satisfied with none that bore
not some affinity to her only standard of manly beauty.

To add to the pleasure with which Laura surveyed the completion of her
labours, she had that day received a letter from Mrs Douglas, in which
mention was made of Hargrave.

In her first letters to Laura, Mrs Douglas had entirely avoided this
subject. Almost a month Laura had waited, with sickening impatience, for
some hint from which she might gather intelligence of Hargrave's
motions--in vain. Her friend had been provokingly determined to believe
that the subject was disagreeable to her correspondent. Laura at last
ventured to add, to one of her letters, a postscript, in which, without
naming the Colonel, she inquired whether the ---- regiment was still at
Perth. She blushed as she glanced over this postscript. She thought it
had an air of contrivance and design. She was half tempted to destroy
the letter; but she could not prevail on herself to make a more direct
inquiry; and to forbear making any was almost impossible. An answer had
this day arrived; and Laura read no part of it with such interest, as
that which, with seeming carelessness, informed her that the Colonel had
been several times at the parsonage: and that Mrs Douglas understood
from report, that he was soon to visit London.

Again and again did Laura read this passage, and ponder every word of it
with care. I am playing the fool, said she to herself, and laid the
letter aside; took it up again to ascertain some particular expression,
and again read the paragraph which spoke of Hargrave, and again paused
upon his name. She was so employed when her father entered, and she made
an instinctive motion to conceal the paper; but the next moment she held
it out to him, saying, 'This is from Mrs Douglas.' 'Well, my love,' said
the Captain, 'if there are no secrets in it, read it to me. I delight in
Mrs Douglas's simple affectionate style.' Laura did as she was desired;
but when she reached the sentence which began with the name of Hargrave,
she blushed, hesitated for a moment, and then, passing over it, began
the next paragraph.

Without both caution and self-command, the most upright woman will be
guilty of subterfuges, where love is in question. Men can talk of the
object of their affections--they find pleasure in confiding, in
describing, in dwelling upon their passion--but the love of woman seeks
concealment. If she can talk of it, or even of any thing that leads to
it, the fever is imaginary, or it is past. 'It is very strange,' said
the Captain, when Laura had concluded, 'that Mrs Douglas never mentions
Hargrave, when she knows what an interest I take in him.' Laura coloured
crimson, but remained silent. 'What do you think can be her reason?'
asked the Captain. This was a question for which Laura could find no
evasion short of actual deceit; and, with an effort far more painful
than that from which her little artifice had saved her, her lovely face
and neck glowing with confusion, she said: 'She does mention--only I--I.
Please to read it yourself;' and she pointed it out to her father, who,
prepared by her hesitation to expect something very particular, was
surprised to find the passage so unimportant. 'Why, Laura,' said he,
'what was there to prevent you from reading this?' To this question
Laura could make no reply; and the Captain, after gazing on her for some
moments in vain hope of an explanation, dismissed the subject, saying,
with a shrug of his shoulders, 'Well, well--women are creatures I don't
pretend to understand.'

Laura had often and deeply reflected upon the propriety of confiding to
her father her engagement with Hargrave. Vague as it was, she thought a
parent had an indisputable right to be informed of it. Her promise too
had been conditional, and what judge so proper as her father to watch
over the fulfilment of its conditions? What judge so proper as her
father to examine the character, and to inspect the conduct, of the man
who might one day become her husband? But, amidst all the train of
delightful visions which this thought conjured up, Laura felt that
Hargrave's conduct had been such as she could not endure that her
father should remember against his future son. Captain Montreville was
now at a distance from Hargrave. Before they could possibly meet, her
arguments, or her entreaties, might have so far prevailed over the
subsiding passions of her father, as to dissuade him from a fashionable
vindication of her honour. But what was to restore her lover to his
present rank in the Captain's regard? What would blot from his
recollection the insult offered to his child? Without mention of that
insult, her tale must be almost unintelligible; and she was conscious
that, if she entered on the subject at all, her father's tenderness, or
his authority, might unlock every secret of her breast. The time when
her engagement could produce any consequence was distant. Ere it
arrived, something unforeseen might possibly remove her difficulties;
or, at the worst, she hoped that, before she permitted her father to
weigh the fault of Hargrave, she should be able to balance against it
the exemplary propriety of his after conduct. She was not just satisfied
with this reasoning; but weaker considerations can dissuade us from what
we are strongly disinclined to do; and to unveiling her own partiality,
or the unworthiness of its object, Laura's disinclination was extreme.
She determined therefore to put off the evil hour; and withdrew her
father's attention from the subject of the letter, by inquiring whether
he had seen Warren, and whether he had settled his business
satisfactorily? The Captain replied, that though it was not absolutely
settled, he hoped it was now in a fair way of being so; and informed her
of Warren's promise. 'Yet,' added he, 'any one of a thousand trifles may
make such an animal forget or neglect the most important concern.' 'What
sort of man did he seem?' inquired Laura. 'Man!' repeated the Captain,
contemptuously. 'Why, child, he is a creature entirely new to you. He
talks like a parrot, looks like a woman, dresses like a monkey, and
smells like a civet-cat. You might have lived at Glenalbert for half a
century, without seeing such a creature.' 'I hope he will visit us,'
said Laura, 'that we may not return home without seeing at least one of
the curiosities of London.'




CHAPTER IX


The next day, as Captain Montreville sat reading aloud to his daughter,
who was busy with her needle, Mr Warren was announced.

Laura, who concluded that he had business with her father, rose to
retire; but her visitor, intercepting her, took both her hands, saying,
'Pray, Ma'am, don't let me frighten you away.' With a constitutional
dislike to familiarity, Laura coolly disengaged herself, and left the
room, without uttering a syllable; but not before Warren had seen enough
of her to determine, that, if possible, he should see her again. He was
struck with her extraordinary beauty, which was heightened by the little
hectic his forwardness had called to her cheek; and he prolonged his
visit to an unfashionable length, in the hope of her return. He went
over all the topics which he judged proper for the ear of a stranger of
his own sex;--talked of the weather, the news, the emptiness of the
town, of horses, ladies, cock-fights, and boxing-matches. He informed
the Captain, that he had given directions to his agent to examine into
the state of the annuity; inquired how long Miss Montreville was to
grace London with her presence; and was told that she was to leave it
the moment her father could settle the business, on account of which
alone he had left Scotland. When it was absolutely necessary to conclude
his visit, Mr Warren begged permission to repeat it, that he might
acquaint Captain Montreville with the success of his agent; secretly
hoping, that Laura would another time be less inaccessible.

Laura meanwhile thought his visit would never have an end. Having
wandered into every room to which she had access, and found rest in none
of them, she concluded, rather rashly, that she should find more comfort
in the one from which his presence excluded her. That disease of the
mind in which by eager anticipations of the future many are unfitted
for present enjoyment, was new to the active spirit of Laura. The
happiness of her life, (and in spite of the caprices of her mother, it
had, upon the whole, been a happy one), had chiefly arisen from a
constant succession of regular, but varied pursuits. The methodical
sequence of domestic usefulness, and improving study, and healthful
exercise, afforded calm yet immediate enjoyment; and the future pleasure
which they promised was of that indefinite and progressive kind which
provokes no eager desires, no impatient expectation. Laura, therefore,
had scarcely known what it was to long for the morrow; but on this day,
the morrow was anticipated with wishful solicitude,--a solicitude which
banished from her mind even the thoughts of Hargrave. Never did youthful
bridegroom look forward to his nuptial hour with more ardour, than did
Laura to that which was to begin the realization of her prospects of
wealth and independence. The next day was to be devoted to the sale of
her picture. Her father was on that day to visit Mr Baynard at Richmond,
whither he had been removed for the benefit of a purer air; and she
hoped on his return, to surprize her beloved parent with an unlooked-for
treasure. She imagined the satisfaction with which she should spread
before him her newly acquired riches,--the pleasure with which she would
listen to his praises of her diligence;--above all, her fancy dwelt on
the delight which she should feel in relieving her father from the
pecuniary embarrassment, in which she knew him to be involved by a
residence in London so much longer than he had been prepared to expect.

That she might add to her intended gift the pleasure of surprize, she
was resolved not to mention her plan for to-morrow; and with such
subjects in contemplation, how could she rest,--of what other subject
could she speak? She tried to banish it from her mind, that she might
not be wholly unentertaining to her father, who, on her account, usually
spent his evenings at home. But the task of amusing was so laborious,
that she was glad to receive in it even the humble assistance of Miss
Julia Dawkins.

This young lady had thought it incumbent on her to assault our heroine
with a most violent friendship; a sentiment which often made her
sufficiently impertinent, though it was a little kept in check by the
calm good sense and natural reserve of Laura. The preposterous
affectation of Julia sometimes provoked the smiles, but more frequently
the pity of Laura; for her real good nature could find no pleasure in
seeing human beings make themselves ridiculous, and she applied to the
cure of Miss Dawkins's foibles, the ingenuity which many would have
employed to extract amusement from them. She soon found, however, that
she was combating a sort of Hydra, from which, if she succeeded in
lopping off one excrescence, another was instantly ready to sprout.
Having no character of her own, Julia was always, as nearly as she was
able, the heroine whom the last read novel inclined her to personate.
But as those who forsake the guidance of nature are in imminent danger
of absurdity, her copies were always caricatures. After reading Evelina,
she sat with her mouth extended in a perpetual smile, and was so very
timid, that she would not for the world have looked at a stranger. When
Camilla was the model for the day, she became insufferably rattling,
infantine, and thoughtless. After perusing the Gossip's story, she, in
imitation of the rational Louisa, suddenly waxed very wise--spoke in
sentences--despised romances--sewed shifts--and read sermons. But, in
the midst of this fit, she, in an evil hour, opened a volume of the
Nouvelle Eloise, which had before disturbed many wiser heads. The shifts
were left unfinished, the sermons thrown aside, and Miss Julia returned
with renewed _impetus_ to the sentimental. This afternoon her studies
had changed their direction, as Laura instantly guessed by the lively
air with which she entered the room, saying that she had brought her
netting, and would sit with her for an hour. 'But do, my dear,' added
she, 'first shew me the picture you have been so busy with; Mamma says
it is beautiful, for she peeped in at it the other day.'

It must be confessed, that Laura had no high opinion of Miss Dawkins's
skill in painting; but she remembered Moliere's old woman, and went with
great good will to bring her performance. 'Oh charming,' exclaimed Miss
Julia, when it was placed before her; 'the figure of the man is quite
delightful; it is the very image of that bewitching creature Tom Jones.'
'Tom Jones?' cried Laura, starting back aghast. 'Yes, my dear,'
continued Julia; 'just such must have been the graceful turn of his
limbs--just such his hair, his eyes, those lips, that when they touched
her hand, put poor Sophia into such a flutter.' The astonishment of
Laura now gave way to laughter, while she said, 'Really Miss Dawkins you
must have a strange idea of Tom Jones, or I a very extraordinary one of
Leonidas.' 'Leonce, you mean, in Delphine,' said Julia; 'Oh, he is a
delightful creature too.' 'Delphine!' repeated Laura, to whom the name
was as new as that of the Spartan was to her companion. 'No, I mean this
for the Greek general taking his last leave of his wife.' 'And I
think,' said Captain Montreville, approaching the picture, 'the
suppressed anguish of the matron is admirably expressed, and contrasts
well with the scarcely relenting ardour of the hero.' Miss Julia again
declared, that the picture was charming, and that Leontine, as she was
pleased to call him, was divinely handsome; but having newly replenished
her otherwise empty head with Fielding's novel, she could talk of
nothing else; and turning to Laura said, 'But why were you so offended,
that I compared your Leontine to Tom Jones?--Is he not a favourite of
yours?' 'Not particularly so,' said Laura. 'Oh why not?--I am sure he is
a delightful fellow--so generous--so ardent. Come, confess--should you
not like of all things to have such a lover?' 'No, indeed,' said Laura,
with most unusual energy; for her thoughts almost unconsciously turned
to one whose character she found no pleasure in associating with that of
Fielding's hero. 'And why not?' asked Miss Julia. 'Because,' answered
Laura, 'I could not admire in a lover qualities which would be odious in
a husband.' 'Oh goodness!' cried Miss Julia, 'do you think Tom Jones
would make an odious husband?' 'The term is a little strong,' replied
Laura; 'but he certainly would not make a pleasant yoke-fellow. What is
your opinion, Sir?' turning to her father. 'I confess,' said the
Captain, 'I should rather have wished him to marry Squire Western's
daughter than mine. But still the character is fitted to be popular.' 'I
think,' said Laura, 'he is indebted for much of the toleration which he
receives, to a comparison with the despicable Blifil.' 'Certainly,' said
the Captain; 'and it is unfortunate for the morality of the book, that
the reader is inclined to excuse the want of religion in the hero, by
seeing its language made ridiculous in Thwackum, and villanous in
Blifil. Even the excellent Mr Alworthy excites but feeble interest; and
it is not by the character which we respect, but by that in which we are
interested, that the moral effect on our minds is produced.' 'Oh,' said
Miss Julia, who very imperfectly comprehended the Captain's observation,
'he might make a charming husband without being religious; and then he
is so warm-hearted--so generous.' 'I shall not dispute that point with
you just now,' replied Laura, 'though my opinion differs materially from
yours; but Tom Jones's warmth of heart and generosity do not appear to
me of that kind which quality a man for adorning domestic life. His
seems a constitutional warmth, which in his case, and I believe, in most
others, is the concomitant of a warm temper,--a temper as little
favourable to gentleness in those who command, as to submission in
those who obey. If by generosity you mean the cheerful relinquishing of
something which we really value, it is an abuse of the term to apply it
to the profusion with which your favourite squanders his money.'

'If it is not generous to part with one's money,' said Miss Julia, 'I am
sure I don't know what is.'

'The quiet domestic generosity which is of daily use,' replied Laura,
'is happily not confined to those who have money to bestow;--but may
appear in any of a thousand little acts of self-denial.' Julia, whose
ideas of generosity, culled from her favourite romances, were on that
gigantic kind of scale that makes it unfit for common occasions, and
therefore in danger of total extinction, was silent for some moments,
and then said, 'I am sure you must allow that it was very noble in Jones
to bury in his own miserable bosom his passion for Sophia, after he knew
that she felt a mutual flame.' 'If I recollect right,' said Laura,
smiling at the oddity of Julia's phrases, 'he broke that resolution; and
I fancy the merely _resolving_ to do right, is a degree of virtue, to
which even the most profligate attain many times in their lives.'

Miss Dawkins, by this time more than half-suspected her companion of
being a Methodist. 'You have such strict notions,' said she, 'that I see
Tom Jones would never have done for you.' 'No,' said Captain
Montreville, 'Sir Charles Grandison would have suited Laura infinitely
better.' 'Oh no, papa,' said Laura, laughing; 'if two such formal
personages as Sir Charles and I had met, I am afraid we should never
have had the honour of each other's acquaintance.'

'Then, of all the gentlemen who are mentioned in novels,' said Miss
Julia, 'tell me who is your favourite?--Is it Lord Orville, or Delville,
or Valancourt, or Edward, or Mortimer, or Peregrine Pickle, or'--and she
ran on till she was quite out of breath, repeating what sounded like a
page of the catalogue of a circulating library.

'Really,' said Laura, when a pause permitted her to speak, 'my
acquaintance with these accomplished persons is so limited that I can
scarcely venture to decide; but, I believe, I prefer the hero of Miss
Porter's new publication--Thaddeus of Warsaw. Truly generous, and
inflexibly upright, his very tenderness has in it something manly and
respectable; and the whole combination has an air of nature that
interests one as for a real friend.' Miss Dawkins had never read the
book, and Laura applied to her father for a confirmation of her opinion.
'Yes, my dear,' said the Captain, 'your favourite has the same
resemblance to a human character which the Belvidere Appollo has to a
human form. It is so like man that one cannot absolutely call it divine,
yet so perfect, that it is difficult to believe it human.'

At this moment Miss Julia was seized with an uncontrollable desire to
read the book, which, she declared, she should not sleep till she had
done; and she went to dispatch a servant in quest of it.

Laura followed her down stairs, to ask from Mrs Dawkins a direction to a
picture-dealer, to whom she might dispose of her performance. Mrs
Dawkins said she knew of no such person; but directed Laura to a
printshop, the master of which was her acquaintance, where she might get
the intelligence she wanted.

On the following morning, as soon as Captain Montreville had set out for
Richmond, his daughter, sending for a hackney coach, departed on the
most interesting business she had ever undertaken. Her heart fluttered
with expectation--her step was buoyant with hope, and she sprung into
the carriage with the lightness of a sylph. Stopping at the shop which
her landlady recommended, she was there directed to several of the
professional people for whom she was enquiring, and she proceeded to the
habitation of the nearest. As she entered the house, Laura changed
colour, and her breath came quick. She stopped a moment to recover
herself, and then followed her conductor into the presence of the
connoisseur. Struck with the sight of so elegant a woman, he rose, bowed
very low, and supposing that she came to make some addition to her
cabinet, threw open the door of his picture-room, and obsequiously hoped
that she might find something there worthy of her attention. Laura
modestly undeceived him, saying, that she had brought in the carriage
which waited for her, a picture which she wished to dispose of. This
statement instantly put to flight the servility of her hearer; who, with
completely recovered consequence, inquired the name of the artist; and
being answered, that the picture was not the work of a professional man,
wrinkled his nose into an expression of ineffable contempt, and said--'I
make it a rule never to buy any of these things--they are generally such
vile daubs. However to oblige so pretty a lady,' added he, (softening
his contumelious aspect into a leer), 'I may look at the thing, and if
it is at all tolerable'--'There is no occasion to give you that
trouble,' said Laura, turning away with an air which again half
convinced the man that she must be a person of consequence. He muttered
something of 'thinking it no trouble;' to which she gave no attention,
but hastened to her carriage, and ordered the coachman to drive to the
show-room of an Italian.

Laura did not give him time to fall into the mistake of the other, but
instantly opened her business; and Mr Sonini was obligingly running
himself to lift the picture from the carriage, when it was brought in by
Mrs Dawkins' maid, whom Laura had requested to attend her. Having placed
the picture, the Italian retreated a few paces to examine the effect,
and then said--'Ah! I do see--dis is leetle after de manner of
Correggio--very pretty--very pretty, indeed.' The hopes of Laura rose
high at these encouraging words; but suffered instantaneous depression,
when he continued, with a shake of his head, 'but 'tis too new--quite
moderne--painted in dis contri.--Painter no name--de picture may be all
so good as it vil--it never vil sell. Me sorry,' added he, reading
Laura's look of disappointment, 'me sorry displease such bell angela;
but cannot buy.' 'I am sorry for it,' said Laura, and sighing heavily,
she courtesied and withdrew.

Her next attempt was upon a little pert-looking man, in a foreign dress,
and spectacles. 'Hum,' said he, 'a picture to sell--well, let us
see't.--There, that's the light. Hum--a poor thing enough--no
keeping--no costûme. Well, Ma'am, what do you please to ask for this?'
'I should be glad, Sir, that you would fix a price on it.'
'Hum--well--let me think--I suppose five guineas will be very fair.' At
this proposal, the blood mounted to the cheeks of Laura; and she raised
her eyes to examine whether the proposer really had the confidence to
look her in the face. But finding his eye steadily fixed on her, she
transferred her suspicions from the honesty of the bidder to the merits
of her piece, and mildly answering, 'I shall not, I think, be disposed
to part with it at that price,' she motioned to the servant to carry it
back to the coach.

One trial still remained; and Laura ordered her carriage to an obscure
street in the city. She was very politely received by Mr Collins,--a
young man who had himself been an artist; but whom bad health had
obliged to relinquish a profession which he loved. 'This piece has
certainly great merit,' said he, after examining it, 'and most gladly
would I have made the purchase; but my little room is at present
overstocked, and, to own the truth to you, the picture is worth more
than my wife and four little ones can afford to venture upon
speculation, and such is the purchase of the work, however meritorious,
of an unknown artist. But if you were to place it in the exhibition, I
have no doubt that it would speedily find a purchaser.' The prospect
which the Exhibition held forth, was far too distant to meet the present
exigency; for Laura well knew that her father would find almost
immediate occasion for the price of her labours; and with a heavy sigh
she returned to her carriage.

What now remained but to return home with the subject of so much
fruitless toil. Still, however, she determined to make one effort more,
and returned to inquire of the printseller, whether he knew any other
person to whom she could apply? He had before given his whole list, and
could make no addition to it. But observing the expression of blank
disappointment which overcast her face, he offered, if she would trust
him with the picture, to place it where it would be seen by his
customers, and expressed a belief that some of them might purchase it.
Laura thankfully accepted the offer, and after depositing with him her
treasure, which had lost much of its value in her eyes, and naming the
price she expected, she returned home; making on her way as many
sombrous reflections on the vanity and uncertainty of all sublunary
pursuits, as ever were made by any young lady in her eighteenth year.

She sat down in her now solitary parlour--suffered dinner to be placed
before her and removed, without knowing of what it consisted; and when
the servant who brought it disappeared, began, like a true heroine, to
vent her disappointment in tears. But soon recollecting that, though she
had no joyful surprize awaiting her father, she might yet gladden it
with a smiling welcome, she started up from her melancholy
posture--bathed her eyes--placed the tea equipage--ordered the first
fire of the season to displace the faded fennel in the chimney--arranged
the apartment in the nicest order--and had just given to everything the
greatest possible appearance of comfort, when her father arrived. She
had need, however, of all her firmness, and of all the elation of
conscious self-control, to resist the contagious depression of
countenance and manner with which Captain Montreville accosted her. He
had good reason for his melancholy. Mr Baynard, his early acquaintance,
almost the only person known to him in this vast city, had that morning
breathed his last. All access to his papers was of course at present
impossible; and until a person could be chosen to arrange his affairs,
it would be impracticable for Captain Montreville to ascertain whether
there existed any voucher for the payment of the price of the annuity.
Harassed by his repeated disappointments, and unendowed by nature with
the unbending spirit that rises in disaster, he now declared to Laura
his resolution to remain in London only till a person was fixed upon for
the management of Mr Baynard's affairs--to lay before him the
circumstances of his case--and then to return to Scotland, and trust to
a correspondence for concluding the business.

At this moment nothing could have been further from Laura's wish than to
quit London. She was unwilling to forfeit her remaining hope that her
picture might find a purchaser, and a still stronger interest bound her
to the place which was so soon to be the residence of Hargrave. But she
saw the prudence of her father's determination--she felt the necessity
of relinquishing a mode of life so unsuitable to his scanty income, and
she cheerfully acquiesced in his proposal of returning home. Still some
time must elapse, before their departure; and she indulged a hope, that
ere that time expired, the produce of her labours might lighten their
pecuniary difficulties.

Captain Montreville retired early; and Laura, wearied out with the toils
and the disappointments of the day, gladly resigned herself to the sleep
of innocence.

Laura was indebted partly to nature, but more to her own exertion, for
that happy elasticity of spirit which easily casts off lighter evil,
while it readily seizes, and fully enjoys, pleasure of moderate
intensity, and of frequent attainment. Few of the lesser sorrows of
youth can resist the cheering influence of early morn; and the petty
miseries which, in the shades of evening, assume portentous size and
colour, diminish wonderfully in the light of the new-risen sun. With
recovered spirits, and reviving hopes, Laura awoke to joys which the
worldly know not,--the joys of pious gratitude--of devout
contemplation--of useful employment; and so far was her persevering
spirit from failing under the disappointments of the preceding day, that
she determined to begin a new picture from the moment she was settled at
Glenalbert, to compose it with more care, and finish it with greater
accuracy, than the former; and to try its fate at the exhibition. She
did not think the season of her father's depression a fit one for
relating her mortifying adventures, and she found means to amuse him
with other topics till he left her, with an intention to call in
Portland Street.

He had not been gone long, when Mr Warren's curricle stopped at the
door, and the young gentleman, on being informed that the Captain was
abroad, inquired for Miss Montreville. After paying his compliments like
one secure of a good reception, he began--'How could you be so cruel as
to refuse me the pleasure of seeing you the other day--do you know I
waited here a devilish long time just on purpose, though I had promised
to take the Countess of Bellamer out an airing, and she was off with
Jack Villars before I came.' 'I am sorry,' said Laura, 'that I deprived
her Ladyship of your company.' 'I should not have minded it much, if you
had but come at last--though the Countess is the prettiest creature in
London--curse me if she isn't--the present company always excepted.' 'Do
you mean the exception for me, or for yourself?' said Laura. 'Oh now,
how can you ask such a question?--I am sure you know that you are
confoundedly handsome.' Laura gravely surveyed her own face in an
opposite looking-glass, and then, with the nonchalance of one who talks
of the most indifferent thing in nature, replied,--'Yes, I think my
features are uncommonly regular.' Warren was a little embarrassed by so
unusual an answer to what he intended for a compliment. 'The girl,'
thought he, 'must be quite a fool to own that she thinks herself so
handsome.' However, after some consideration, he said,--'It is not so
much the features, as a certain _je ne sçai quoi_--a certain charm--one
does not know well what to call it, that makes you look so divine.' 'I
should suppose,' said Laura, 'from the subject you have chosen to amuse
me, that the charm, whatever it is, has no great connection with
intellect.' Warren hesitated; for he began to have some suspicions that
she was laughing at him, in spite of the immoveable gravity of her
countenance. 'It--it isn't--Demme, it isn't so much to amuse you; but
when I see a pretty woman, I never can help telling her of it--curse me
if I can.' 'And do you often find that your intelligence has the
advantage of novelty?' said Laura; an arch smile beginning to dimple her
cheek. 'No, 'pon honour,' replied the beau, 'the women are getting so
insufferably conceited, they leave one nothing new to tell them.' 'But
some gentlemen,' said Laura, 'have the happy talent of saying old things
so well, that the want of novelty is not felt.' The moment the words had
passed her lips, she perceived, by the gracious smile which they
produced, that Mr Warren had applied them to himself; and the thought of
being guilty of such egregious flattery, brought the colour to her face.
Any explanation, however, would have been actual rudeness; and while the
consciousness of her involuntary duplicity kept her silent, her
companion enjoyed her confusion; which, together with the compliment, he
interpreted in a way most satisfactory to his vanity, and thankfully
repaid with a torrent of praises in his very best style.

So little value did Laura affix to his commendations, that she was
beginning to find extreme difficulty in suppressing a yawn, when it
occurred to her that it might save her father a journey to Portland
Street, if she could detain Mr Warren till he arrived. Having made an
observation, which has been more frequently made than profited by, that
most people prefer talking to listening, she engaged her companion in a
description of some of the fashionable places of public resort, none of
which she had seen; in which he acquitted himself so much to his own
satisfaction, that, before they separated, he was convinced that Laura
was one of the most penetrating judicious women of his acquaintance; and
having before remarked, that, with the help of a little rouge, and a
fashionable riding-habit, she would look better in a curricle than any
woman in London, he resolved, that if it depended on him, her residence
in town should not be a short one. In this laudable resolution, he was
confirmed by a consideration of the insolence and extravagance of a
certain female, to whose place in his establishment he had some vague
idea of advancing Miss Laura, though there was a stateliness about both
her and her father, which he suspected might somewhat interfere with his
designs in her favour. Soon after the Captain arrived, he took his
leave, having no new intelligence to communicate, nor indeed any other
purpose in his visit, except that which had been served by his interview
with Laura.

As soon as he was gone, Laura went down stairs to beg that Miss Dawkins
would accompany her after dinner to the print-shop, to inquire what had
been the fate of her picture. More than one person, she was told, had
admired it, and expressed a desire to become the owner; but the price
had been a formidable obstacle, and it remained unsold.

Almost every evening did Laura, with Mrs Dawkins or her daughter for an
escort, direct her steps to the print-shop, and return from her
fruitless walk with fainter and fainter hope.




CHAPTER X


Montague de Courcy had dined tête-à-tête with an old uncle from whom he
had no expectations, and was returning home to sup quietly with his
mother and sister, when his progress was arrested by a group occupying
the whole breadth of the pavement, and he heard a female voice which,
though unusually musical, had in it less of entreaty than of command,
say, 'Pray, Sir, allow us to pass.' 'Not till I have seen the face that
belongs to such a figure,' answered one of a party of young men who were
rudely obstructing the passage of the lady who had spoken. With this
condition, however, she seemed not to intend compliance, for she had
doubled her veil, and pertinaciously resisted the attempts of her
persecutors to raise it.

De Courcy had a rooted antipathy to all manner of violence and
oppression, especially when exercised against the more defenceless part
of the creation; and he no sooner ascertained these circumstances, than,
with one thrust of his muscular arm, (which, to say the truth, was more
than a match for half a dozen of the puny fry of sloth and
intemperance), he opened a passage for the lady and her companion;
steadily detained her tormentors till she made good her retreat; and
then, leaving the gentlemen to answer, as they best could, to their own
interrogatories of 'What do you mean?' and 'Who the d--l are you?' he
followed the rescued damsel, with whose appearance, considering the
place and the hour, he was extremely surprised.

Her height, which certainly rose about the beautiful, perhaps even
exceeded the majestic; her figure, though slender, was admirably
proportioned, and had all the appropriate roundness of the feminine
form; her dress, though simple, and of matronly decency, was not
unfashionable; while the dignity of her gait, and the composure of her
motion, suited well with the majesty of her stature and mien.

While De Courcy was making these observations, he had offered the lady
his arm, which she accepted, and his escort home, which she declined,
saying, that she would take refuge in a shop, till a coach could be
procured. Nor was he less attentive to her companion, although the
latter was a little, elderly, vulgar-looking woman, imperfections which
would have utterly disqualified her for the civility of many a polite
gentleman.

This person had no sooner recovered the breath of which her supposed
danger, and the speed of her rescue from it had deprived her, than she
began, with extreme volubility, to comment on her adventure. 'Well,' she
cried, 'if that was not the forwardest thing ever I seed. I am sure I
have comed home afore now of an evening a matter of five hunder times,
and never met with no such thing in my life. But its all along of my
being so saving of your money; for I might have took a coach as you'd
have had me: but its no longer ago nor last week, as I comed from my
tea, at that very Mr Wilkins's, later nor this, and nobody so much as
spoke to me; but catch me penny wise again. Howsoever, it's partlins
your own doings; for if you hadn't staid so long a-looking at the
pictures in the shop we shouldn't have met with them there men.
Howsoever, Miss Montreville, you did right enough not to let that there
jackanapes see your face, otherwise we mightn't have got off from them
fellors tonight.'

The curiosity of De Courcy thus directed, overcame his habitual dislike
to staring, and rivetted his eyes on a face, which, once seen, was
destined never to be forgotten. Her luxuriant hair, (which De Courcy at
first thought black, though he afterwards corrected this opinion), was
carelessly divided on a forehead, whose spotless whiteness was varied
only by the blue of a vein that shone through the transparent skin. As
she raised her mild religious dark grey eyes, their silken lashes rested
on the well-defined but delicate eye-brow; or, when her glance fell
before the gaze of admiration, threw a long shade on a cheek of
unequalled beauty, both for form and colour. The contour of her
features, inclining to the Roman, might perhaps have been called
masculine, had it not been softened to the sweetest model of maiden
loveliness, by the delicacy of its size and colouring. The glowing
scarlet of the lips, formed a contrast with a complexion
constitutionally pale, but varying every moment; while round her easily
but firmly closing mouth, lurked not a trace of the sensual or the vain,
but all was calm benevolence, and saintly purity. In the contemplation
of a countenance, the perfect symmetry of which was its meanest charm,
De Courcy, who was a physiognomist, suffered the stream of time, as well
as that of Mrs Dawkins's eloquence, to flow on without notice, and first
became sensible that he had profited by neither, when the shop-boy
announced that the carriage was at the door. While handing the ladies
into the carriage, De Courcy again offered his attendance, which Laura,
gracefully thanking him for his attentions, again declined; and they
drove off just as he was about to inquire where they chose to be set
down.

Now, whether it was that Laura was offended at De Courcy's inspection of
her face, or whether she saw any thing disagreeable in his; whether it
was that her pride disdained lodgings in Holborn, or that she desired
not to be recognized by one who had met with her in such a situation,
certain it is, that she chose the moment when that gentleman was placing
her voluble companion in the coach, to give the coachman her directions,
in sounds that escaped the ears of De Courcy. As he had no means of
remedying this misfortune, he walked home, and philosophically
endeavoured to forget it in a game at chess with his mother. The
fidelity of a historian, however, obliges us to confess, that he this
evening played in a manner that would have disgraced a school-boy. After
mistaking his antagonist's men for his own, playing into check, throwing
away his pieces, and making false moves, he answered his mother's
question of 'Montague, what are you doing?', by pushing back his chair,
and exclaiming, 'Mother, you never beheld such a woman.'

'Woman!' repeated Mrs De Courcy, settling her spectacles, and looking
him full in the face. 'Woman!' said his sister, laying down Bruyere,
'Who is she?'

'I know not,' answered De Courcy, 'but had Lavater seen her, he could
scarcely have believed her human.'

'What is her name?'

'The woman who attended her called her Montreville.'

'Where did you meet her?'

'In the street.'

'In the street!' cried Harriet, laughing. 'Oh, Montague, that is not
half sentimental enough for you. You should have found her all in a
shady bower, playing on a harp that came there nobody knows how; or, all
elegant in India muslin, dandling a beggar's brat in a dirty cottage.
But let us hear the whole adventure.'

'I have already told you all I know,' answered De Courcy. 'Now, Madam,
will you give me my revenge.' 'No, no,' said Mrs De Courcy, 'I will play
no more; I should have no glory in conquering such a defenceless enemy.'
'Well, then,' said Montague, good-humouredly, 'give me leave to read to
you, for I would rather amuse you and Harriet in any other way than by
sitting quietly to be laughed at.'

After the ladies had retired for the night, De Courcy meditated for full
five minutes on the descent from Laura Montreville's forehead to her
nose, and bestowed a proportionable degree of consideration upon other
lines in her physiognomy; but it must be confessed, that by the time he
arrived at the dimple in her left cheek, he had forgotten both Lavater
and his opinions, and that his recollection of her mouth was somewhat
confused by that of her parting smile, which he more than once declared
aloud to himself was 'heavenly.' We are credibly informed, that he
repeated the same expression three times in his sleep; and whether it
was that his dreams reminded him of Mrs Dawkins's eloquence, or whether
his memory was refreshed by his slumbers, he had not been long awake
before he recollected that he had heard that lady mention a Mr Wilkins,
and hint that he kept a print-shop. By a proper application to the
London directory, he easily discovered the print-seller's abode, and
thither he that very day repaired.

Mr Wilkins was not in the shop when De Courcy entered it, but the
shop-boy said his master would be there in a minute. This minute
appearing to De Courcy of unusual length, he, to while it away, began to
examine the prints which hung around. His eye was presently attracted by
the only oil picture in the shop; and his attention was fixed by
observing, that it presented a striking resemblance of his old
school-fellow Hargrave. He turned to make some inquiry of the shop-boy,
when Mr Wilkins came in, and his interest reverted to a different
object. The question, however, which he had come to ask, and which to
ask would have three minutes before appeared the simplest thing in the
world, now faltered on his tongue; and it was not without something like
hesitation, that he inquired whether Mr Wilkins knew a Miss Montreville.
Desirous to oblige a person of De Courcy's appearance, Wilkins
immediately related all that he knew of Laura, either from his own
observation, or from the report of her loquacious landlady; and
perceiving that he was listened to with attention, he proceeded further
to detail his conjectures. 'This picture is painted by her,' said he,
'and I rather think the old Captain can't be very rich, she seemed so
anxious to have it sold.' De Courcy again turned to the picture, which
he had before examined, and on this second inspection, was so fortunate
as to discover that it bore the stamp of great genius,--an opinion in
which, we believe, he would have been joined by any man of
four-and-twenty who had seen the artist. 'So,' thought he, 'this lovely
creature's genius is equal to her beauty, and her worth perhaps
surpasses both; for she has the courage to rise superior to the silly
customs of the world, and can dare to be useful to herself and to
others. I knew by the noble arching of her forehead, that she was above
all vulgar prejudice:' and he admired Laura the more for being a
favourable instance of his own penetration,--a feeling so natural, that
it lessens even our enmity to the wicked, when we ourselves have
predicted their vices. It must be owned, that De Courcy was a little
hasty in his judgment of Laura's worth; but the sight of such a face as
hers, gives great speed to a young man's decision upon female character.
He instantly purchased the picture, and recollecting that it is highly
proper to patronize genius and industry, he desired Mr Wilkins to beg
that a companion might be painted. He then returned home, leaving orders
that his purchase should follow him immediately.

Though nature, a private education, and studious habits, made De Courcy
rather reserved to strangers, he was, in his domestic circle, one of the
most communicative persons in the world; and the moment he saw his
mother, he began to inform her of the discoveries he had made that
morning. 'Montreville!' said Mrs De Courcy, when he had ended, 'can that
be William Montreville who was in the ---- regiment when your father was
the major of it?' 'Most likely he is,' said Montague, eagerly. 'Many a
time did he hold you upon his horse, and many a paper kite did he make
for you.' 'It must be the same,' said Montague; 'the name is not a
common one; it certainly must be the same.' 'I can hardly believe it,'
said Mrs De Courcy; 'William Montreville married that strange imprudent
woman, Lady Harriet Bircham. Poor Montreville!--he deserved a better
wife.' 'It cannot be he,' said De Courcy, sorrowfully; 'no such woman
could be the mother of Miss Montreville.' 'He settled in Scotland
immediately after his marriage,' continued Mrs De Courcy, 'and since
that time I have never heard of him.' 'It is the same then,' said
Montague, his countenance lightening with pleasure, 'for Miss
Montreville is a Scotch woman. I remember his kindness. I think I almost
recollect his face. He used to set me on his knee and sing to me; and
when he sung the Babes in the Woods, I pretended to go to sleep on his
bosom, for I thought it not manly to cry; but when I looked up, I saw
the tears standing in his own eyes. I will go and see my old friend this
very hour.' 'You have forgotten,' said Mrs De Courcy, 'that you promised
to escort Harriet to the park, and she will be disappointed if you
engage yourself elsewhere.' De Courcy, who would have postponed any
personal gratification rather than disappoint the meanest servant in his
household, instantly agreed to defer his visit; and as it had never
occurred to him that the claims of relationship were incompatible with
those of politeness, he did not once during their walk insinuate to his
sister that he would have preferred another engagement.

Never had he, either as a physiognomist or as a man, admired any woman
so much as he did Laura; yet her charms were no longer his only, or even
his chief, magnet of attraction towards the Montrevilles. Never before
had any assemblage of features possessed such power of him, but De
Courcy's was not a heart on which mere beauty could make any very
permanent impression; and, to the eternal disgrace of his gallantry, it
must be confessed, that he scarcely longed more for a second interview
with Laura, than he did for an opportunity of paying some grateful
civilities to the man who, twenty years before, had good-naturedly
forgone the society of his equals in age, to sing ballads and make
paper-kites for little Montague. Whatever member of his family occupied
most of his thoughts, certain it is, that he spoke much more that
evening of Captain Montreville than of his daughter, until the arrival
of the painting afforded him occasion to enlarge on her genius,
industry, and freedom from vulgar prejudice. On these he continued to
descant, till Mrs De Courcy smiled, and Harriet laughed openly; a
liberty at which Montague testified his displeasure, by carefully
avoiding the subject for the rest of the evening.

Meanwhile the ungrateful Laura had never, from the hour in which they
met, bestowed one thought upon her champion. The blackness of his eyes,
and the whiteness of his teeth, had entirely escaped her observation;
and, even if she had been asked, whether he was tall or short, she could
scarcely have given a satisfactory reply. For this extraordinary
stupidity, the only excuse is, that her heart was already occupied, the
reader knows how, and that her thoughts were engrossed by an intention
which her father had mentioned, of borrowing money upon his half-pay.

Though Laura had never known affluence, she was equally a stranger to
all the shames, the distresses, and embarrassments of a debtor; and the
thoughts of borrowing what she could not hope by any economy to repay,
gave to her upright mind the most cutting uneasiness. But no resource
remained; for, even if Captain Montreville could have quitted London
within the hour, he had not the means of defraying the expence of the
journey. Warren's promises had hitherto produced nothing but hope, and
there was no immediate prospect that the payment of the annuity would
relieve the difficulty.

Laura turned a despairing wish towards her picture, lamenting that she
had ever formed her presumptuous scheme, and hating herself for having,
by her presence, increased the perplexities of her father. She prevailed
upon him, however, to defer borrowing the money till the following day;
and once more, accompanied by Julia, bent her almost hopeless steps
towards the print-shop.

Silent and melancholy she passed on, equally regardless of the
admiration which she occasionally extorted, and of the animadversions,
called forth by the appearance of so elegant a woman on foot, in the
streets of the city. As she entered the shop, she cast a half-despairing
look towards the place where her picture had hung, and her heart leapt
when she perceived that it was gone. 'Well, Ma'am,' said Wilkins,
approaching her, 'it is sold at last, and here is the money;' and he put
into her hands by far the largest sum they had ever contained. 'You may
have as much more whenever you please,' continued he, 'for the gentleman
who bought it wants a companion painted.'

Laura spoke not,--she had not indeed the power to speak;--but she raised
her eyes with a look that intelligibly said, 'Blessed Father! thy tender
mercies are over all thy works.' Recollecting herself, she thanked
Wilkins, liberally rewarded him for his trouble, and taking her
companion by the arm, she hastened homewards.

The sight of Laura's wealth powerfully affected the mind of Miss
Dawkins, and she formed an immediate resolution, to grow rich by similar
means. One little objection to this scheme occurred to her, namely, that
she had learnt to draw only flowers, and that even this humble branch of
the art she had discontinued since she left school. But she thought that
a little practice would repair what she had lost, and that though
perhaps flowers might not be so productive as historical pieces, she
might better her fortune by her works; at the least, they would furnish
her with clothes and pocket-money. Upon this judicious plan, she
harangued with great volubility to Laura, who, buried in her own
reflections, walked silently on, unconscious even of the presence of her
loquacious companion. As she approached her home, she began to frame a
little speech, with which she meant to present her treasure to her
father; and, on entering the house, she flew with a beating heart to
find him. She laid her wealth upon his knee. 'My dearest father,' she
began, 'the picture'--and she fell upon his neck and burst into tears.
Sympathetic tears stood in the eyes of Montreville. He had been
surprized at the stoicism with which his daughter appeared to him to
support her disappointment, and he was not prepared to expect from her
so much sensibility to success. But though Laura had learnt from
frequent experience, how to check the feelings of disappointment, to
pleasure such as she now felt she was new, and she could not controul
its emotions. So far was she, however, from thinking that sensibility
was bestowed merely for an ornament, (an opinion which many fair ladies
appear to entertain), that the expression of it was always with her an
occasion of shame. Unable at this moment to contain herself, she burst
from her father's embrace, and hiding herself in her chamber, poured
forth a fervent thanksgiving to Him who 'feedeth the ravens when they
cry to him.'

'This money is yours my love,' said Captain Montreville to her when she
returned to the parlour. 'I cannot bear to rob you of it. Take it, and
you can supply me when I am in want of it.' The face and neck of Laura
flushed crimson. Her whole soul revolted at the thought of her father's
feeling himself a pensioner on her bounty. 'No indeed, Sir,' she replied
with energy, 'it is yours--it always was intended for you. But for you,
I could never have acquired it.' 'I will not disappoint your generosity,
my dearest,' said Montreville, 'part I will receive from you, but the
rest you must keep. I know you must have many little wants.' 'No, Papa,'
said Laura, 'so liberal has your kindness been to me, that I cannot at
this moment name a single want.' 'Wishes, then, you surely have,' said
the Captain, still pressing the money upon her; 'and let the
first-fruits of your industry supply them.' 'I have no wishes,' said
Laura; 'none at least which money can gratify:--and when I have,' added
she, with an affectionate smile, 'let their gratification come from you,
that its pleasure may be doubled to me.'

No creature could less value money for its own sake than did Laura. All
her wealth, the fruit of so much labour and anxiety, would not have
purchased the attire of a fashionable lady for one evening. She, who
had been accustomed to wander in happy freedom among her native hills,
was imprisoned amidst the smoke and dust of a city. Without a companion,
almost without an acquaintance to invigorate her spirits for the task,
it was her province to revive the fainting hopes, and beguile the tedium
of her father, who was depressed by disappointments in his pursuits, and
disconcerted by the absence of his accustomed employments. She was at a
distance from the object, not only of a tender affection, but of a
romantic passion,--a passion, ardent in proportion as its object was
indebted to her imagination for his power. Scarce three months had
elapsed since the depravity of this idolized being had burst on her in
thunder, the thought of it was still daggers to her heart, and it was
very doubtful whether he could ever give such proofs of reformation as
would make it safe for her to restore him to his place in her regard.
Yet be it known to all who, from similar circumstances, feel entitled to
fancy themselves miserable, and thus (if they live with beings of common
humanity) make others really so, that no woman ever passed an evening in
more heartfelt content, than Laura did that which our history is now
recording. She did, indeed, possess that which, next to the overflowings
of a pious heart, confers the purest happiness on this side Heaven. She
felt that she was USEFUL. Nay, in one respect the consciousness of a
successful discharge of duty has the advantage over the fervours of
devotion; for Providence, wise in its bounty, has decreed, that while
these foretastes of heavenly rapture are transient lest their delights
should detach us from the business of life, we are invited to a
religious practice by the permanence of its joys.




CHAPTER XI


Captain Montreville and his daughter were engaged in a friendly contest
on the subject of a companion for the picture, when De Courcy made his
visit. Though, as he entered the room, something unfashionably like a
blush visited his face, his manner was free from rustic embarrassment.
'I believe,' said he, advancing towards Captain Montreville, 'I must
apologize for the intrusion of a stranger. My person must have outgrown
your recollection. My name, I hope, has been more fortunate. It is De
Courcy.' 'The son I presume of Major De Courcy,' said Montreville,
cordially extending his hand to him. 'Yes,' replied Montague, heartily
taking the offered hand; 'the same whose childhood was indebted to you
for so many of its pleasures.' 'My old friend Montague!' cried the
Captain, 'though your present form is new to me, I remember my lovely
little noble-spirited play-fellow with an interest which I have never
felt in any other child except this girl.' 'And who knows,' said De
Courcy, turning to Laura with a smile, 'who knows what cause I may find
to rue that Miss Montreville is past the age when I might have repaid
her father's kindness by assiduities to her doll?' 'That return,' said
Laura, colouring, as she recollected her late champion, 'would not have
been quite so arduous as the one you have already made. I hope you have
had no further trouble with those rude people?' 'No, Madam,' answered De
Courcy, 'nor did I expect it; the spirits that are so insolent where
they dare, are submissive enough where they must.' Laura now explained
to her father her obligation to De Courcy; and the Captain having
thanked him for his interference, the conversation took a general turn.

Elated as he was with the successful industry and genius of his child,
and pleased with the attentions of the son of his friend, the spirits
of Montreville rose higher than they had ever done since his arrival in
London. Won by the happy mixture of familiarity and respect, of spirit
and gentleness, which distinguished the manners of De Courcy, the
Captain became cheerful, and Laura almost talkative: the conversation
rose from easy to animated, from animated to gay; and two hours had
passed before any of the party was aware that one-fourth of that time
was gone. Laura's general reserve with strangers seemed to have forsaken
her while she conversed with De Courcy. But De Courcy was not a
stranger. By character she knew him well. Hargrave had mentioned to her
his intimacy with De Courcy. Nay, De Courcy had, at the hazard of his
life, saved the life of Hargrave. Laura had heard her lover dwell with
the eloquence of gratitude upon the courage, the presence of mind, with
which (while others, confounded by his danger, or fearing for their own
safety, left him to perish without aid), De Courcy had seized a fisher's
net, and, binding one end of it to a tree, the other to his body, had
plunged into the water, and intercepted Hargrave, just as the stream was
hurrying him to the brink of a tremendous fall. 'All struggle was in
vain,' had Hargrave said to the breathless Laura; 'but for that noble
fellow, that minute would have been my last, and I should have died
without awakening this interest so dear to my heart.' 'I wish I could
see this De Courcy,' had Laura fervently exclaimed. 'Heaven forbid!' had
been the hasty reply, 'for your habits--your pursuits--your sentiments
are so similar, that he would gain without labour, perhaps without a
wish, the heart that has cost me such anxious toil.' A recollection of
this dialogue stole into the mind of Laura, as De Courcy was expressing
an opinion which, though not a common one, coincided exactly with her
own. For a moment she was absent and thoughtful; but De Courcy continued
the conversation, and she resumed her gaiety.

When unwillingly at last he rose to take his leave, Captain Montreville
detained him while he made some friendly inquiries into the history of
the family for the last twenty years. As the questions of the Captain,
however, were not impertinently minute, nor the answers of De Courcy
very copious, it may not be improper to supply what was wanting in the
narrative.

Major De Courcy was the representative of a family which could trace its
descent from the times of the Conqueror,--an advantage which they valued
above the hereditary possessions of their fathers; and if an advantage
ought to be estimated by its durability, they were in the right; for
the former, of necessity, was improved by time, the latter seemed
tending towards decline. Frederick De Courcy was suffered to follow his
inclinations in entering the army; because that was the profession the
most suitable to the dignity of an ancient house. That it was of all
professions the least likely to improve his fortune, was a consideration
equally despised by his father and himself. When he attained his
seventeenth year, a commission was purchased for him. Stored with
counsels sufficient, if he followed them, to conduct him to wisdom and
happiness, and with money sufficient to make these counsels of no avail,
he set out from his paternal home to join his regiment. Thus was De
Courcy, in his dangerous passage from youth to manhood, committed to the
guidance of example, and the discretion belonging to his years;
fortified, indeed, by the injunctions of his parents, and his own
resolutions, never to disgrace his descent. This bulwark, he soon found,
was too weak to resist the number and variety of the weapons which
attacked him. The shafts of ridicule assailed him; his own passions took
up arms; his pride itself turned against him. Unable to resist with
vigour, he ceased to resist at all; and was hurried into every folly in
which his companions wished for the assistance of his purse, or the
countenance of his example.

His father's liberal allowance was soon insufficient to supply his
extravagance. He contracted debts. After severe but well-merited
reproof, his father paid them; and De Courcy promised amendment. A whole
week of strict sobriety ensued; and the young soldier was convinced that
his resolution was immutable. And so he would probably have found it, if
now, for the first time since man was made, temptation had become weaker
by victory, or virtue stronger by defeat. But though he had tasted the
glittering bait of folly, and though he at times confessed its
insipidity, the same lure again prevailed, and De Courcy was again
entangled in pecuniary embarrassments. What was to be done? His father
had declared his irrevocable determination no further to injure the
interests of his younger children by supplying the prodigality of the
eldest. By the advice of a veteran in profusion, De Courcy had recourse
to Jews. As it was in his father's power to disinherit him, it was
necessary to conceal these transactions; and the high spirit of
Frederick was compelled to submit to all the evasions, embarrassments,
and wretchedness that attend a clandestine course of action.

Often did he illustrate the trite observation that no life is more
remote from happiness than a life of pleasure. The reward of all his
labour was satiety; the wages of all his self-reproaches were the
applause of the thoughtless for his spirit; the lamentations of the
wise, that an honourable mind should be so perverted. In his
twenty-second year, his father's death left him at liberty to pay his
old debts, and to contract new. That which has preserved the virtue of
many young men, prevented the total ruin of De Courcy. He became
attached to a virtuous woman; and, influenced much by inclination, more
by the wishes of her friends, she married him.

Mrs De Courcy brought no dower except the beauty which had captivated
her husband, the sweetness which prolonged her power, and the good sense
which made that power useful. She therefore did not think herself
entitled to remonstrate very warmly on the negligence that appeared in
the conduct of her husband's affairs; and it was not until after she
became a mother that she judged it proper to interfere. Her gentle
remonstrances, however, produced little effect beyond promises and vague
resolutions, that at some '_convenient season_' the Major would examine
into the real state of his fortune.

Accident at last befriended her endeavours. Soon after the birth of her
second child (a daughter), a demand was made on De Courcy for a debt
which he had not the means of discharging. He could not apply to the
Jew; for he had solemnly pledged to Mrs De Courcy, that he would never
more have recourse to that ruinous expedient. He was discussing with his
wife the possibility of procuring the money by a new mortgage, while
Montague, then a child of four year's old, was playing in the room.
Struck by the melancholy tone of his mother's voice, the child forsook
his play, and taking hold of her gown, looked anxiously from one
mournful face to the other. 'I am as averse to it as you can be, my
dear,' said the Major, 'but there is no other way of raising the money.'
'Wait till I am a man, Papa,' said the child; 'and then Betty says, I
shall have a good two thousand pounds a-year, and I will give it all to
you. And here,' added he, searching his little pocket, 'here is my
pretty shilling that Captain Montreville gave me; take it, and don't
look sorry any more.' Mrs De Courcy passionately loved this child.
Overcome by the feeling of the moment, she clasped him in her arms. 'My
poor wronged child!' she exclaimed, and burst into tears.

These were the first words of bitterness which Major De Courcy had ever
heard from her lips; and overcome by them, and by her tears, he gave her
a hasty promise, that he would, that very hour, begin the examination
of his affairs. Sensible of her advantage, she permitted not his purpose
to slumber, but persuaded him to a full inquiry into the extent of his
debts; and in order to remove him from future temptation, she prevailed
on him to sell his commission, and reside at his paternal Norwood.

After selling so much of his estate as to clear the remainder from all
incumbrance, he found his income diminished to little more than a third
of its original extent. His family pride reviving at the sight of the
halls of his fathers, and a better affection awakening in his
intercourse with the descendants of those whom his ancestors had
protected, he determined to guard against the possibility of Norwood and
its tenants being transferred to strangers, and entailed the remains of
his property on Montague De Courcy, in the strictest form of English
law. For Mrs De Courcy he made but a slender provision. For his daughter
he made none: but he determined to save from his income a sum sufficient
to supply this deficiency. He was still a young man, and never thought
of doubting whether he might live long enough to accomplish his design,
or whether the man who had found an income of £2000 a-year too small for
his necessities, might be able to make savings from one of £800. In
spite of the soberness of the establishment, which during the novelty of
his reform he allowed Mrs De Courcy to arrange, he continued to find
uses for all the money he could command. His fields wanted inclosures;
his houses needed repairs; his son's education was an increasing
expence; and he died while Montague was yet a boy, without having
realized any part of his plans in favour of his daughter.

He left the highest testimony to the understanding and worth of Mrs De
Courcy, by making her the sole guardian of his children; and the steady
rectitude and propriety of her conduct justified his confidence. Aware
of the radical defect of every mode of education that neglects or severs
the domestic tie, yet convinced that the house where he was master, and
the dependents he could command, were dangerous scenes and companions
for a youth of Montague's spirit, she committed him to the care of a
clergyman, whose residence was a few miles distant from Norwood, and who
also took charge of four other boys of about the same age.

This gentleman was admirably fitted for his trust; for he had a
cultivated understanding, an affectionate heart, sound piety, and a calm
but inflexible temper. Add to which, he had travelled, and, in his
youth, associated much with men of rank, and more with men of talents;
though, since he had become a pastor, the range of his moral observation
had been narrowed to the hearts of a few simple villagers, which were
open to him as to their father and their friend. The boys studied and
played together, but they each had a separate apartment; for Mr
Wentworth had himself been educated at a public school, and never
recollected without shuddering, the hour when his youthful modesty had
shrunk from sharing his bed with a stranger, and when the prayer for his
parents, which he was mingling with his tears, had been disturbed by the
jokes of a little rabble.

Every Saturday did Montague bend his joyful course homewards, regardless
of summer's heat or winter storms. Every Sunday did his mother spend in
mixing the lessons of piety with the endearments of love; in striving to
connect the idea of a superintending God with all that is beautiful--all
that is majestic--in nature. As her children grew up, she unfolded to
them the peculiar doctrines of Christianity, so sublime, so consolatory,
so suitable to the wants of man. Aware how much occasion favours the
strength of impressions, she chose the hour of strong remorse on account
of a youthful fault, while the culprit yet trembled before the offended
Majesty of Heaven, to explain to her son the impossibility that
repentance should, of itself, cancel errors past, or that the great
Lawgiver should accept a few ineffectual tears, or a tardy and imperfect
obedience, as a compensation for the breach of a law that is perfect.
When she saw that the intended impression was made, she spoke of the
great atonement that once was offered, not to make repentance
unnecessary, but to make it effectual; and, from that time, using this
as one of the great landmarks of faith, she contributed to make it in
the mind of De Courcy a practical and abiding principle. The peculiar
precepts of Christianity she taught him to apply to his actions, by
applying them herself; and the praise that is so often lavished upon
boldness, dexterity, and spirit, she conscientiously reserved for acts
of candour, humility, and self-denial.

Her cares were amply rewarded, and Montague became all that she wished
him to be. He was a Christian from the heart, without being either
forward to claim, or ashamed to own, the distinction. He was industrious
in his pursuits, and simple in his pleasures. But the distinctive
feature of his character, was the total absence of selfishness. His own
pleasure or his own amusement he never hesitated to sacrifice to the
wishes of others; or, to speak more correctly, he found his pleasure
and amusement in theirs. Upon the whole, we do not say that Montague De
Courcy had no faults; but we are sure he had none that he did not strive
to conquer. Like other human beings, he sometimes acted wrong; but we
believe he would not deliberately have neglected a known duty to escape
any worldly misfortune; we are sure he would not deliberately have
committed a crime to attain any earthly advantage.

Desirous that her darling should enjoy the benefits of the most liberal
education, yet afraid to trust him to the temptations of an English
university, Mrs De Courcy went for some years to reside in Edinburgh
during the winter--in summer she returned with her family to Norwood. To
his private studies, and his paternal home, Montague returned with ever
new delight; for his tastes and his habits were all domestic. He had no
ambitious wishes to lure him from his retreat, for his wants were even
more moderate than his fortune. Except in so far as he could make it
useful to others, he had no value for money, nor for anything that money
could buy, exclusive of the necessaries of life, books, and implements
of chemistry. The profession which he had chosen was that of improving
and embellishing his estate; and, in the tranquil pleasures of a country
gentleman, a man of taste, a classical scholar, and a chemist, he found
means to occupy himself without injury to his health, his morals, or his
fortune. His favourite amusements were drawing and physiognomy; and,
like other favourites, these were sometimes in danger of making
encroachments, and advancing into the rank of higher concerns. But this
he prevented by an exact distribution of his time, to which he
resolutely adhered.

With his mother and his sister he lived in the most perfect harmony,
though the young lady had the reputation of a wit, and was certainly a
little addicted to sarcasm. But she was in other respects amiable, and
incapable of doing anything to offend her brother, whose indignation
indeed never rose but against cruelty, meanness, or deceit.

De Courcy had just entered his twenty-fifth year, when a rheumatic fever
deprived his mother of the use of her limbs; and, forsaking all his
employments, he had quitted his beloved Norwood to attend her in London,
whither she had come for the benefit of medical advice. He had been but
a few days in town when he met with Miss Montreville, and the impression
which her beauty made, the second interview tended to confirm.

Montague had never, even in imagination, been in love. The regulation of
his passions, the improvement of his mind, and the care of his property,
had hitherto left him no leisure for the tender folly. He had scarcely
ever thought of a young woman's face, except with a reference to
Lavater's opinion, nor of her manners, except to wonder how she could be
so obtrusive. But in contemplating Laura's face, he forgot the rules of
the physiognomist; and, in the interesting reserve of her manners, he
found continually something to desire. If, at the close of his visit, he
was not in love, he was at least in a fair way for being so. He was
assailed at once by beauty, grace, good sense, and sweetness; and to
these Laura added the singular charm of being wholly insensible to their
effects upon the beholder. No side glance was sent in search of
admiration; no care was taken to compose her drapery; no look of triumph
accompanied her judicious remarks; no parade of sensibility disgraced
her tenderness. Every charm was heightened by a matchless absence of all
design; and against this formidable battery had poor De Courcy to make
his stand, just at the inauspicious hour when, for the first time in his
life, he had nothing else to do.




CHAPTER XII


As soon as De Courcy was gone, Captain Montreville launched out warmly
in his praise. Laura joined in the eulogium; and, the next morning,
forgot that there was such a person in existence, when she read a letter
from Mrs Douglas, of which the following was a part.

     'Before this reaches you, Colonel Hargrave will be far on his
     way to London. It is possible that you may have no interest in
     this journey; but, lest you should, I wish to prevent your
     being taken by surprize. Since your departure he has repeatedly
     visited us; and endeavoured, both directly and indirectly, to
     discover your address. Perhaps you will think my caution
     ill-timed; but I acted according to my best judgment, in
     avoiding to comply with his desire. I think, however, that he
     has elsewhere procured the information he wanted; for his
     features wore an air of triumph, as he asked my commands for
     you. Dear child of my affections, richly endowed as you are
     with the dangerous gift of beauty, you have hitherto escaped,
     as if by miracle, from the snares of folly and frivolity. My
     hearts prayer for you is, that you may be as safe from the
     dangers that await you, in the passions of others, and in the
     tenderness of your own heart. But alas! my beloved Laura,
     distant as I am from you, ignorant as I am of the peculiarities
     of your situation, I can _only_ pray for you. I fear to express
     my conjectures, lest I should seem to extort your confidence. I
     fear to caution, lest I should shock or offend you. Yet let me
     remind you, that it is easier, by one bold effort, to reject
     temptation, than to resist its continued allurements.
     Effectually to bar the access of the tempter may cost a painful
     effort--to parley with him is destruction. But I must stop.
     Tears of anxious affection blot what I have written.

                                           'E. DOUGLAS.'

The joyful expectation of seeing Hargrave filled for a time the heart of
Laura, and left no room for other thoughts. The first that found
entrance was of a less pleasing cast. She perceived that Mrs Douglas
suspected Hargrave of the baseness of deliberate seduction; and, with a
feeling of indignation, she collected her writing materials, and sat
down to exculpate him. But, as she again read her friend's expressions
of affection, and considered how little her suspicions were remote from
the truth, she accused herself of ingratitude and injustice in giving
way to any thing like resentment. She thanked Mrs Douglas for her
cautions; but assured her, that the proposals of Hargrave were
honourable, unequivocal, and sanctioned by her father; that they had
been rejected by herself; and, therefore, that no motive, except that of
vindicating him from an unfounded suspicion, should have tempted her to
betray, even to her most confidential friend, a secret which she thought
a woman bound, both in delicacy and in honour, to keep inviolable. She
did not once hint at the cause of her rejecting an offer so splendid,
nor show a trace of the inclination which she had so nobly sacrificed to
virtue, except what appeared in the warmth of her defence of her lover.
For, though she felt that her story would have raised her in her
friend's esteem, she scorned to purchase that advantage at the expence
of another, and retained all her aversion to exposing the faults of
Hargrave.

Having finished her letter, she returned to the more agreeable
contemplation, and began to calculate upon the time when she might
expect to see the Colonel. Her conclusion was, that he would probably
visit her on the following day, and her heart throbbed with delight at
the prospect.

But from the dream of joy, Laura soon returned to the more habitual
consideration of the line of conduct which it was fit that she should
pursue. She saw the folly of committing her happiness to the
guardianship of one whose passions were his masters; and, while it was
her daily prayer that she might not be led into temptation, her
conscience revolted from trusting her conduct to the guidance, her
virtue to the example, of a man whose principles were doubtful. For
Laura's virtue was not of that saint-errant kind that sallies forth in
quest of opportunities to signalize itself, and inflames its pride by
meditation on the wonders it would achieve, if placed in perilous
situations. Distrustful of herself--watchful to avoid occasions of
falling--she had no ambition for the dangerous glory of reforming a rake
into a good husband. She therefore adhered to her determination, that
she would not consent to a union with her lover, till, by a course of
virtuous conduct he had given proof that his offence had been the sudden
fault of a moment, not the deliberate purpose of a corrupted heart.

Yet even in this mitigated view, the recollection was poison to the soul
of Laura. The painful thought was far from new to her, that the passion
of Hargrave was a tribute to her personal charms alone. With such a
passion, even were its continuance possible, Laura felt that she could
not be satisfied. To be the object of it degraded her in her own eyes.
'No, no,' she exclaimed, covering her face with her hands, 'let me not
even legally occupy only the place which the vilest might fill. If I
cannot be the friend, the companion, as well as the mistress, better,
far better, were it that we should part for ever.'

No labour is sufficient to acquaint us fully with our own hearts. It
never occurred to Laura, that she was, as much as Hargrave, the captive
of mere externals; and that his character would never have deceived her
penetration, had it been exhibited in the person of a little red-haired
man, with bandy legs, who spoke broad Scotch, and smoked tobacco. Till
the hour when he had himself dispelled the illusion, the character of
Hargrave, such as she chose to imagine it, had been to her a theme of
the most delightful contemplation; and to its fascinations she had
willingly and entirely resigned herself. The disguise, which was rather
the excuse, than the cause of her passion, had been dropped in part; yet
the passion was as strong as ever. It was, indeed, no longer pleasing,
no longer blind, no longer paramount; for her reason, which had before
been silent, was now permitted to speak, and though it was unable to
conquer, it could control. She imagined the vehemence with which
Hargrave would urge her to shorten the term of his probation, and she
feared that she should find it difficult, perhaps impossible, to resist
his entreaties. She would not, therefore, expose her prudence to too
severe a trial. 'Yes,' said she, 'I will bar the access of the tempter.
I will see Hargrave only once, and that shall be to bid him farewell,
till the stipulated two years are finished. If he really loves me, his
affection will survive absence. If it fail in the trial, I may, though
lost to happiness, find in my solitude a peace that never can visit a
neglected wife.'

This philosophic conclusion was the fruit of her meditations during a
restless night; and having worked herself, as she thought, into a temper
decorously relentless, she proceeded, with all the consistency of her
sex, to adorn her person with a care she had never before bestowed upon
it. She arranged every curl for effect; chose a dress which shewed to
advantage the graceful slope of her shoulders; and heightened the
whiteness of her neck and arms, by contrasting it with fillets of jet.
Though she was but indifferently pleased with her success, it proved
sufficient for her occasions. The day passed away, and Hargrave did not
appear. Laura was disappointed, but not surprized; for it was barely
possible that he could have reached London on that day. On the
succeeding one she thought it likely that he might come; but the
succeeding one was equally barren of event.

On the third she was certain that he would arrive; and, when breakfast
was over, she seated herself in expectation at the window of the front
parlour, started if a carriage stopped, and listened to every voice that
sounded from below stairs. Half-desirous to escape her father's
observation, half-wishing that her interview with Hargrave should be
without witnesses, she persuaded Captain Montreville to go and pay his
respects to Mrs De Courcy. Anxiously she waited, conjectured, doubted,
reconsulted Mrs Douglas's letter. The Captain returned; the hours of
visiting passed away; and still no Hargrave came.

Unwilling to own, even to herself, the extent of her anxiety and
disappointment, Laura talked to her father of his visit, with which he
had been highly pleased. He had been amused with Harriet; charmed with
Mrs De Courcy; and doubly charmed with Montague, whom he praised as a
scholar and a man of sense, as an affectionate brother and a respectful
son; and, to crown all these commendations, he declared, that De Courcy
was more than a match for himself at chess.

When they retired for the night, Laura returned to her conjectures on
the cause of Hargrave's delay. She considered that he might have been
detained on the road, or that he might have found it necessary to make a
visit on his way. She had little doubt, that to see her was the object
of his journey to London at this unfashionable season. She had none,
that he would hurry to her the first moment that it was possible. By
degrees, she persuaded herself into an absolute certainty that she
should see him on the following day; and on that day, she again took her
anxious station in the parlour.

She was ashamed to lean over the window, and could not otherwise see who
entered the house; but she left the room door ajar, that she might have
warning of his approach, held her breath to distinguish the voices from
below, and listened eagerly to every footstep. At last, she imagined
that she heard the wished-for inquiry. She was sure some one pronounced
her name. A man's step ascended the stair; Laura trembled and her breath
came short. She feared to look up, and leant her face on her hand to
conceal her emotion.

The voice of her visitor made her start, and turn her head. It was
Warren!

Expectation had been wound up to its highest pitch, and Laura could not
instantly recover herself. She paid her compliments with a confusion and
trepidation, which Warren interpreted in a way most flattering to his
vanity. He approached her with a look, in which ill-suppressed triumph
contended with laboured condescension; and spoke to her in a voice that
seemed to say, 'Pray, endeavour to reassure yourself.' But Laura was in
no humour to endure his impertinence, and she seized the first
opportunity to leave the room.

Captain Montreville soon entered on the business in which he took such
painful interest, by inquiring whether any traces had yet been
discovered of the sale of his daughter's annuity. Warren, with abundance
of regret and condolence, informed him, that Williams had as yet been
able to discover no mention of the transaction in the books.

This assertion was so far true, that Williams had as yet seen no record
of the business in question; for which Mr Warren could, if he had
chosen, have given a very satisfactory reason. From the moment this
_gentleman_ had first seen Laura, he had been determined not wilfully to
expedite her departure from London; and therefore he had casually
dropped a hint to his man of business, that, as he was already
overwhelmed with a multiplicity of affairs, it was unnecessary to hasten
a concern of such trivial importance; and that he might defer inquiring
into the sale of the annuity till he was at perfect leisure. Had he
insinuated to Williams, that this delay was detaining from his home a
man who could ill afford the consequent expence, or that it was alarming
a father for the future subsistence of his only child, the man of
business would have found leisure to investigate the matter, even if he
had subtracted the necessary time from his hours of rest. But the
upright Mr Warren had given no such intimation; and in this honourable
transaction, he was, for the present, secure from detection, for he knew
that business had called his agent to a distance from London.

Captain Montreville knew not what to think. He could not doubt the
integrity of Mr Baynard, nor could he imagine to what purpose Warren
should deny the transaction; since, if it had really taken place, the
vouchers of it must be found among his deceased friend's papers. He was
persuaded that to examine the books according to the date of the sale,
would be the work of only a few hours; and again he inquired whether the
necessary examination had taken place. Mr Warren answered, that he could
not take it upon him to say that every possible search had yet been
made; but his agent, he said, had examined all the most probable records
of the concern, and would, on his return to town, make a still more
particular scrutiny.

With this unsatisfactory answer, Captain Montreville was obliged to
content himself. He had only one alternative--either to wait in London
the appointment of the person who was to arrange Mr Baynard's papers, or
to return to Scotland, and resign all hopes of the annuity. He feared,
too, to offend Warren by urging him too strongly, since, even should a
voucher of the payment of his £1500 be found, the informality in the
deed would still leave room for litigation. No merely personal interest
would have induced the high spirit of Montreville to conciliate a man
whom he despised as a fool and a coxcomb.--For nothing that concerned
himself alone, would he have submitted to the trouble and anxiety which
he had lately undergone. Ill calculated by nature to struggle with
difficulties, he had long been accustomed to let the lesser disasters
glide by without notice, and to sink, without effort, under the greater.
Disappointed in the woman of his choice, and deprived, by her folly or
perverseness, of the domestic pleasures which he loved, his mind had
taken a cast of melancholy. Early secluded from society, and tormented
by the temper of his wife, he had concentrated all the affections which
solitude confined, and caprice rejected, upon one object: and Laura
became the passion of his soul. The thought of leaving her destitute, of
leaving her sensibility to the scorns, her beauty to the temptations of
poverty, was more than he could bear, and it sometimes almost
overpowered him. He was naturally inclined to indolence, and as, like
all indolent people, he was the creature of habit, his spirits had
suffered much from the loss of the woman who, though too heartless for a
friend, and too bitter for a companion, had, for twenty years, served
him as a sort of stimulus. The same force of habit, joined to her
improving graces and confirming worth, made Laura daily more dear to
him, and he would willingly have given his life to secure her
independence and happiness.

Brooding on the obscurity in which she must remain, whom he judged
worthy to adorn the highest station--on the poverty which awaited her
during his life--on the want to which his death must consign
her,--removed from his habitual occupations, and deprived of the
wholesome air, and exhilarating exercises to which he had long been
accustomed, he allowed his spirits to grow daily more depressed. Along
with the idea of the misfortunes which his death would bring upon his
darling, the fear of death settled on his mind. The little ailments to
which the sedentary are liable, he magnified into the symptoms of mortal
disease; and momentary pain seemed to his fancy to foretell sudden
dissolution. Montreville was fast sinking into a melancholy
hypochondriac.

His daughter's spirits, too, failed under continued expectation, and
continued disappointment; for day after day passed on, and still
Hargrave came not. Her father's dejection increased her own, and her
ill-disguised depression had a similar effect on him. While, however,
Captain Montreville gave way without effort to his feelings, the more
vigorous mind of Laura struggled to suppress the sorrow which she saw
was contagious. She sometimes prevailed upon her father to seek
amusement abroad, sometimes endeavoured to amuse him at home. She read
to him, sung to him, exerted all her conversation talent to entertain
him; and often, when all was in vain, when he would answer her by forced
smiles, languid gestures, or heavy sighs, she would turn aside to wipe
the tears from her eyes, then smile, and attempt her task again.

In these labours she had now, it is true, the assistance of an
intelligent companion. De Courcy came often; and the Captain seemed to
receive a pleasure from his visits, which even Laura's efforts could not
bestow. The tenderness of his child, indeed, appeared sometimes to
overpower him; for, when she was exerting herself to divert his
melancholy, he would gaze upon her for a while in an agony of fondness,
then suddenly desire to be left alone, and dismiss her from his
presence. But De Courcy's attentions seemed always welcome. He soothed
the irritated mind with respectful assiduities--he felt for its sickly
sensibility--and, though ignorant of the cause of Montreville's
dejection, found in alleviating it a pleasure, which was more than
doubled by the undisguised approbation and gratitude of Laura.

His sister, too, came to visit Miss Montreville, and, apologizing for
her mother, who was unable to accompany her, brought an invitation for
the Captain and his daughter to dine in Audley Street. Laura, in hopes
of amusing her father, prevailed on him to accept the invitation; and an
early day was fixed for the visit. She was pleased with the frankness
and gaiety of Harriet's manner, and her curiosity was roused by Captain
Montreville's praises of Mrs De Courcy.

The day arrived, and Laura prepared to accompany her father, not without
trepidation at the thought of entering, for the first time in her life,
a room which she expected to find full of strangers. When she had
finished dressing, he examined her with triumph; and thought that
nothing in nature was so perfect. The thought was legible in his
countenance, and Laura, with great simplicity, answered to it as if it
had been spoken. 'Except to please you,' said she, 'I wish I had been
neither tall nor pretty, for then I should have been allowed to move
about without notice.' 'Then, too,' thought she with a heavy sigh, 'I
should have been loved for my self, and not have been perhaps
forgotten.'

Laura was not ignorant of her own beauty, but no human being could less
value the distinction. She was aware of the regularity of her features;
but as she never used a looking-glass, unless for the obvious purpose of
arranging her dress, she was insensible of the celestial charm which
expression added to her face. The seriousness and dignity of her manners
made it difficult to address her with common-place compliment; and she
had accordingly never experienced any effect of her beauty, but one
which was altogether disagreeable to her, that of attracting notice. To
being the subject of observation, Laura retained that Caledonian dislike
which once distinguished her country-women, before they were polished
into that glitter which attracts the vulgar, and paid for the
acquisition by the loss of the timidity which, like the ærugo of ancient
coin, adds value in the eye of taste to intrinsic worth, while it
shields even baser merit from contempt.

Laura's courage failed her when, throwing open the door of a large room,
Mrs de Courcy's servant announced Captain and Miss Montreville. But she
revived when she perceived that the company consisted only of the
mistress of the house, her son and daughter. Mrs de Courcy's appearance
seemed to Laura very prepossessing. She still wore the dress of a widow;
and her countenance bore the traces of what is called a green old age;
for though the hair that shaded her commanding forehead was silver
white, her dark eyes retained their brightness; and though her
complexion was pale, it glowed at times with the roses of youth. The
expression of her face, which was serious even to solemnity, brightened
with a smile of inexpressible benevolence, as she received her guests;
and, even in the difficulty with which she appeared to move, Laura found
somewhat interesting. Her air and manners, without a tincture of
fashion, spoke the gentlewoman. Her dress, her person, her demeanour,
every thing about her seemed consistently respectable. The dinner was
plain, but excellent. The few indispensable pieces of plate were antique
and massive; and the only attendant who appeared, seemed to have grown
gray in the service of the family. Laura had pleasure in observing, that
the reverence with which this old man addressed his lady, softened into
affectionate solicitude to please when he attended De Courcy, who, in
his turn, seemed to treat him with the most considerate gentleness.

Mrs De Courcy behaved to Laura with distinguished politeness; addressed
her often; endeavoured to draw forth her latent powers; and soon made
her sensible that the impression she had given, was no less favourable
than that which she had received. Montague's conversation had its
accustomed effect on Montreville, and the lively Harriet gave spirit to
the whole. The evening passed most agreeably; and Laura was sorry when
the hour of separation arrived. Mrs De Courcy courteously thanked her
for her visit, and begged her to repeat it; but Harriet sportively
objected: 'No, no,' said she, 'if you come back, you will not leave a
heart among all the household--even old John's seems in danger.'

'Well, Mamma,' continued she, when Laura was gone, 'what do you think of
my brother's beauty?' 'I think,' said Mrs De Courcy, 'that Montague's
praises did her no more than justice. She is the most lovely, the most
elegant woman I ever saw,' 'She is no doubt beautiful and interesting,'
returned Harriet; 'but I must still think she has too much of the
buckram of the old school to be elegant.' Montague bit his lip, and
tried, before he spoke, to ascertain that he was not angry. 'You are too
severe, Harriet,' said Mrs De Courcy. 'Miss Montreville's reserve is not
stiffness--it is not "buckram;" it is rather the graceful drapery,
embellishing what it veils.' 'Mother,' cried Montague, grasping her
hand, 'you have more candour, sense, and taste, than all the misses in
England.' 'Oh! pray, except Miss Montreville and the present company,'
said Harriet, laughing. 'She, you know, is all perfection; and _I_ have
really candour, sense, and taste enough to admire her more than ever I
did any woman, except my little self.' De Courcy threw his arm around
her--'I see by that good-natured smile,' said he, 'that my dear Harriet
has at least candour enough to pardon the folly of a wayward brother.'
And, for the rest of the evening, he treated her with even more than his
usual attentive kindness.

From this day Miss De Courcy frequently accompanied her brother on his
visits to the Montrevilles, and Laura was a welcome guest in Audley
Street. By degrees Mrs De Courcy and she discovered the real worth of
each other's character, and their mutual reserve entirely disappeared.
Between Laura and De Courcy, almost from the first hour of their
acquaintance, there seemed (to use the language of romance) a sympathy
of souls;--an expression which, if it has any meaning, must mean the
facility with which simple, upright, undesigning minds become
intelligible to each other. Even the sarcastic Harriet found, in the
chaste propriety of Laura's character, something to command respect; and
in her gentleness and warmth of heart, something to engage affection;
while, in her ideas, which solitude had slightly tinged with romance,
though strong sense had preserved them from absurdity, and in her
language, which sometimes rose to the very verge of poetry, she found
constantly somewhat to interest and amuse.

Meanwhile Montreville's dejection seemed to increase; and Laura's health
and spirits, in spite of her efforts to support them, daily declined.
Hargrave did not appear, and vainly did she endeavour to account for his
absence. She at first conjectured that he had found it impossible to
leave Scotland at the time he proposed; but a second letter from Mrs
Douglas had mentioned his departure, and repeated the assurance that,
however obtained, he had information of Laura's address, since he had
undertaken to be the bearer of a letter from a neighbouring gentleman to
Captain Montreville.

She next supposed that he had stopped on the road, or quitted it on some
errand of business or pleasure--but a newspaper account of a fête
champêtre at Lady Bellamer's elegant villa at Richmond, was graced,
among other fashionable names, with that of the handsome Colonel
Hargrave, nephew and heir of Lord Lincourt. No supposition remained to
be made, except the mortifying one, that three months of absence had
erased her image from the fickle heart of Hargrave. She, who had herself
consigned her lover to a banishment of two years, could not bear that
he should voluntarily undergo one of a few weeks. Nay, she had once
herself resigned him; but to be herself resigned without effort, was
more than she could endure. Her appetite, her sleep forsook her; her
ordinary employments became irksome; and even the picture, the price of
which was so soon to be necessary, she had not the spirits to finish.

But one who was accustomed every night to examine the thoughts and
actions of the day, was not likely to remain long a prey to inactive
melancholy. Not satisfied with languid efforts in the discharge of duty,
she reproached herself for every failure. She upbraided herself as a
wicked and slothful servant, who, when the means of usefulness were put
in her power, suffered them to remain unimproved; as a rebel who had
deserted the service of her rightful master, to bow to the worse than
Egyptian bondage of her passions. She accused herself of having given up
her love, her wishes, her hopes and fears, almost her worship, to an
idol; and no sooner did this thought occur to the pious mind of Laura,
than she became resigned to her loss. She even felt grateful--with such
gratitude as the wretch feels under the knife which amputates the morbid
limb.

Unused to let her self-reproaches pass without improvement, she
resolved, by vigorous efforts, to become herself again. She even called
in the aid of a decent pride. 'Shall I,' she cried, 'who have vowed to
overcome the world--I who have called myself by that glorious name, a
Christian, sink from these honours into a love-sick girl? Shall all my
happiness, all my duties, the comfort of my father, the very means of
his support, be sacrificed to a selfish passion? Or is a love, whose
transient duration has proved its degenerate nature, of such value to
me, that I must repay it with my whole heart and soul?'

These reflections were not made at once, nor were they at once
effectual; but, when made, they were called in as oft as the image of
Hargrave intruded unbidden; and constant and regular occupation was
again employed to second their operation. The picture was again resorted
to; but, as it afforded rather an unsocial employment, and as Laura's
company was more than ever necessary to her father, it proceeded but
slowly.

De Courcy was now a daily visitor. Sometimes he brought books, and would
spend hours in reading aloud, an accomplishment in which he excelled.
Sometimes he would amuse the Captain and his daughter by experiments in
his favourite science. With a gentleness peculiar to himself, he tried
to prevent the little annoyances to which hypochondriacs are subject.
He invented a hundred little indulgences for the invalid; and no day
passed in which Montreville was not indebted for some comfort, or some
amusement, to the considerate kindness of De Courcy. At times he would
gently rally the Captain on his imaginary ailments, and sometimes
prevailed on him to take the air in Mrs De Courcy's carriage: though to
such a height had fancy worked upon him, that Montague found it
impossible to persuade him that he was able to endure the fatigue of
walking.

To Laura, De Courcy's behaviour, uniformly respectful and attentive, was
sometimes even tender. But, accustomed to see love only in the
impassioned looks of Hargrave, to hear its accents only in his words of
fire, she did not recognize it in a new form; and to consider De Courcy
as a lover, never once entered her imagination. Captain Montreville was
more clear-sighted, and hence arose much of the pleasure which he took
in De Courcy's visits. Not that he was more knowing in the mysteries of
love than his daughter; but he took it for granted, that no mortal could
withstand her attractions; and he was persuaded that Laura would not
withhold her heart, where she so freely expressed approbation. This
opinion was a proof of the justice of the Captain's former confession,
'that women were creatures he did not understand.' Laura had never
praised Hargrave. She never shrunk from De Courcy's eye,--she never felt
embarrassed by his presence,--she treated him with the frankness of a
sister; and though she reserved her commendations for his absence, she
waited only for that to bestow them with all the warmth which his own
merit and his attentions to her father could demand.

Meanwhile the Captain did not, by a premature disclosure of his hopes,
endanger their completion; and De Courcy continued unconsciously to
foster in his bosom, a passion that was destined to destroy his peace.




CHAPTER XIII


The picture at last was finished, and Laura herself accompanied it to
the print-shop. Wilkins immediately delivered to her the price, which,
he said, had been for some time in his hands. It now occurred to Laura
to ask who had been the purchaser of her work. 'Why, Ma'am,' said
Wilkins, 'the gentleman desired me not to mention his name.' 'Indeed!'
said Laura surprised. 'These were his orders. Ma'am, but I shouldn't
think there could be any great harm in telling it just to you Ma'am.' 'I
have no wish to hear it,' said Laura, with a look which compelled the
confident to unwilling discretion; and again thanking him for the
trouble he had taken, she returned home. The truth was, that De Courcy
had foreseen the probability of Laura's question; and averse to be known
to her under a character that savoured of patronage and protection, had
forbidden the shopkeeper to mention who had purchased the pictures.

Again did Laura, delighted, present to her father the produce of her
labours, her warm heart glowing with the joys of usefulness. But not as
formerly did he with pleasure receive the gift. With the fretfulness of
disease, he refused to share in her satisfaction. Through the gloom of
melancholy, every object appeared distorted; and Captain Montreville saw
in his daughter's well-earned treasure only the wages of degrading toil.
'It is hard, very hard,' said he with a deep sigh, 'that you, my lovely
child, should be dependent on your daily labour for your support.' 'Oh
call it not hard, my dear father,' cried Laura. 'Thanks, a thousand
thanks to your kind foresight, which, in teaching me this blessed art,
secured to me the only real independence, by making me independent of
all but my own exertions.' 'Child,' said Montreville, fretfully, 'there
is an enthusiasm about you that will draw you into ten thousand
errors--you are quite mistaken in fancying yourself independent. Your
boasted art depends upon the taste, the very caprice of the public for
its reward; and you, of course, upon the very same caprice for your very
existence.' 'It is true,' answered Laura mildly, 'that my success
depends upon taste, and that the public taste is capricious; but some, I
should hope, would never be wanting, who could value and reward the
labours of industry--you observe,' added she with a smile, 'that I rest
nothing upon genius.' 'Be that as it may,' returned Captain Montreville,
with increasing querulousness, 'I cannot endure to see you degraded into
an artist, and, therefore, I desire there may be no more of this
traffic.'

This was the first time that Montreville had ever resorted to the method
well known and approved by those persons of both sexes, who, being more
accustomed to the exercise of authority than of argument, choose to
wield the weapon in the use of which practice has made them the most
expert. Laura looked at him with affectionate concern--'Alas!' thought
she, 'if bodily disease is pitiable, how far more deplorable are its
ravages on the mind.' But even if her father had been in perfect health,
she would not have chosen the moment of irritation for reply. Deeply
mortified at this unexpected prohibition, she yet endeavoured to
consider it as only one of the transient caprices of illness, and to
find pleasure in the thought, that the hour was come, when De Courcy's
daily visit would restore her father to some degree of cheerfulness.

But De Courcy's visit made no one cheerful. He was himself melancholy
and absent. He said he had only a few minutes to spare, yet lingered
above an hour; often rose to go, yet irresolutely resumed his seat. At
last, starting up, he said, 'the longer I remain here, the more
unwilling I am to go; and yet I _must_ go, without even knowing when I
may return.' 'Are _you_ going to leave us?' said Montreville, in a tone
of despondency, 'then we shall be solitary indeed.' 'I fear,' said
Laura, looking with kind solicitude in De Courcy's face, 'that something
distressing calls you away.' 'Distressing indeed,' said De Courcy. 'My
excellent old friend Mr Wentworth has lost his only son, and I must bear
the news to the parents.' 'Is there no one but you to do this painful
office?' asked Montreville. 'None,' answered De Courcy, 'on whom it
could with such propriety fall. Wentworth was one of my earliest
friends, he was my father's early friend. I owe him a thousand
obligations; and I would fain, if it be possible, soften this heavy
blow. Besides,' added he, endeavouring to speak more cheerfully, 'I have
a selfish purpose to serve,--I want to see how a Christian bears
misfortune.' 'And can you fix no time for your return?' asked the
Captain, mournfully. De Courcy shook his head. 'You will not return
while your presence is necessary to Mr Wentworth,' said Laura, less
anxious to regain De Courcy's society, than that he support the
character of benevolence with which her imagination had justly vested
him. Grieved by the prospect of losing his companion, fretted by an
indefinite idea that he was wrong in his ungracious rejection of his
daughter's efforts to serve him, ashamed of his distempered selfishness,
yet unable to conquer it, Captain Montreville naturally became more
peevish; for the consciousness of having acted wrong, without the
resolution to repair the fault, is what no temper can stand. 'Your
charity is mighty excursive Laura,' said he. 'If Mr De Courcy delays his
return long, I shall probably not live to profit by it.' Laura, whose
sweetness no captious expressions could ruffle, would have spoken to
turn her father's view to brighter prospects; but the rising sob choked
her voice, and courtesying hastily to De Courcy, she left the room. De
Courcy now no longer found it difficult to depart. He soon bade the
Captain farewell, promising to return as soon as it was possible, though
he had no great faith in Montreville's dismal prediction, uttered in the
true spirit of hypochondriasis, that he would come but to lay his head
in his grave.

As he was descending the stairs, Laura, who never forgot in selfish
feeling to provide for the comfort of others, followed him, to beg that
when he had leisure, he would write to her father. Laura blushed and
hesitated as she made this request, not because she had in making it any
selfish motive whatever, but purely because she was unused to ask
favours. Flattered by the request, but much more by her confusion, De
Courcy glowed with pleasure. 'Certainly I shall write,' said he with
great animation, 'if you--I mean if Captain Montreville wish it.' These
words, and the tone in which they were uttered, made Laura direct a look
of inquiry to the speaker's face, where his thoughts were distinctly
legible; and she no sooner read then, than, stately and displeased, she
drew back. 'I believe it will give my father pleasure to hear from you,
sir,' said she, and coldly turned away. 'Is there no man,' thought she,
'exempt from this despicable vanity--from the insignificant Warren to
the respectable De Courcy?' Poor Montague would fain have besought her
forgiveness for his presumption in supposing it possible that she could
have any pleasure in hearing of him; but the look with which she turned
from him, left him no courage to speak to her again, and he mournfully
pursued his way to Audley Street.

He was scarcely gone when Warren called, and Laura, very little
displeased for his company, took shelter in her own room. Her father,
however, suffered no inconvenience from being left alone to the task of
entertaining his visitor, for Warren found means to make the
conversation sufficiently interesting.

He began by lamenting the Captain's long detention from his home, and
condoled with him upon the effects which London air had produced upon
his health. He regretted that Mr Williams's absence from town had
retarded the final settlement of Montreville's business; informed him
that Mr Baynard's executors had appointed an agent to inspect his
papers; and finally, surprised him by an unconditional offer to sign a
new bond for the annuity. He could not bear, he said, to think of the
Captain's being detained in London to the prejudice of his health,
especially as it was evident that Miss Montreville's suffered from the
same cause. He begged that a regular bond might be drawn up, which he
would sign at a moment's notice, and which he would trust to the
Captain's honour to destroy, if it should be found that the £1500,
mentioned as the price of the annuity, had never been paid.

At this generous proposal, surprise and joy almost deprived Montreville
of the power of utterance; gratefully clasping Warren's hand, 'Oh, sir,'
he exclaimed, 'you have, I hope, secured an independence for my child. I
thank you--with what fervour, you can never know till you are yourself a
father.' Seemingly anxious to escape from his thanks, Warren again
promised that he would be ready to sign the bond on the following day,
or as soon as it was ready for signature. Captain Montreville again
began to make acknowledgements, but Warren, who appeared rather
distressed than gratified by them, took his leave, and left the Captain
to the joyful task of communicating the news to Laura.

She listened with grateful pleasure. 'How much have I been to blame,'
said she, 'for allowing myself to believe that a little vanity
necessarily excluded every kind and generous feeling. What a pity it is
that this man should condescend to such an effeminate attention to
trifles!' Lost to the expectation, almost to the desire of seeing
Hargrave, she had now no tie to London, but one which was soon to be
broken, for Mrs and Miss De Courcy were about to return to Norwood. With
almost unmixed satisfaction, therefore, she heard her father declare,
that in less than a week he should be on his way to Scotland. With
pleasure she looked forward to revisiting her dear Glenalbert, and
anticipated the effects of its quiet shades and healthful air upon her
father. Already she beheld her home, peaceful and inviting, as when,
from the hill that sheltered it, she last looked back upon its simple
beauties. She heard the ripple of its waters; she trod the well-known
path; met the kind familiar face, and listened to the cordial welcome,
with such joy as they feel who return from the land of strangers.

Nor was Montreville less pleased with the prospect of returning to his
accustomed comforts and employments--of feeling himself once more among
objects which he could call his own. His own! There was magic in the
word, that transformed the cottage at Glenalbert into a fairy
palace--the garden and the farm into a little world. To leave London
interfered indeed with his hopes of De Courcy as a lover for his
daughter; but he doubted not that the impression was already made, and
that Montague would follow Laura to Scotland.

His mind suddenly relieved from anxiety, his spirits rose, all his
constitutional good nature returned, and he caressed his daughter with a
fondness that seemed intended to atone for the captious behaviour of the
morning. At dinner he called for wine, a luxury in which he rarely
indulged, drank to their safe arrival at Glenalbert, and obliged Laura
to pledge him to the health of Warren. To witness her father's
cheerfulness was a pleasure which Laura had of late tasted so sparingly,
that it had the most exhilarating effect upon her spirits; and neither
De Courcy nor Hargrave would have been much gratified, could they have
seen the gaiety with which she supported the absence of the one, and the
neglect of the other.

She was beginning to enjoy one of those cheerful domestic evenings which
had always been her delight, when Miss Dawkins came to propose that she
should accompany her and her mother on a visit to Mrs Jones. Laura would
have excused herself, by saying, that she could not leave her father
alone; but the Captain insisted upon her going, and declared that he
would himself be of the party. She had therefore no apology, and,
deprived of the amusement which she would have preferred, contentedly
betook herself to that which was within her reach. She did not sit in
silent contemplation of her own superiority, or of the vulgarity of her
companions; nor did she introduce topics of conversation calculated to
illustrate either; but having observed that even the most ignorant have
some subject on which they can talk with ease and pleasure, and even be
heard with advantage, she suffered others to lead the discourse, rightly
conjecturing that they would guide it to the channel which they judged
most favourable to their own powers. She was soon engaged with Mrs
Dawkins in a dissertation on various branches of household economy, and
to the eternal degradation of her character as a heroine, actually
listened with interest to the means of improving the cleanliness,
beauty, and comfort of her dwelling.

Mrs Jones was highly flattered by the Captain's visit, and exerted
herself to entertain him, her husband being inclined to taciturnity by a
reason which Bishop Butler has pronounced to be a good one. Perceiving
that Montreville was an Englishman, she concluded that nothing but dire
necessity could have exiled him to Scotland. She inquired what town he
lived in; and being answered that his residence was many miles distant
from any town, she held up her hands in pity and amazement. But when she
heard that Montreville had been obliged to learn the language of the
Highlands, and that it was Laura's vernacular tongue, she burst into an
exclamation of wonder. 'Mercy upon me,' cried she, 'can you make that
outlandish spluttering so as them savages can know what you says? Well,
if I had been among them a thousand years, I should never have made out
a word of their gibberish.'

'The sound of it is very uncouth to a stranger,' said Captain
Montreville, 'but now I have learnt to like it.' 'And do them there wild
men make you wear them little red and green petticoats?' asked Mrs
Jones, in a tone of compassionate inquiry. 'Oh no,' said Captain
Montreville, 'they never interfered with my dress. But you seem quite
acquainted with the Highlands. May I ask if you have been there?' 'Aye,
that I have, to my sorrow,' said Mrs Jones; and forthwith proceeded to
recount her adventures, pretty nearly in the same terms as she had
formerly done to Laura. 'And what was the name of this unfortunate
place,' inquired the captain, when, having narrated the deficiency of
hot rolls, Mrs Jones made the pause in which her auditors were
accustomed to express their astonishment and horror. 'That was what I
asked the waiter often and often,' replied she, 'but I could never make
head or tail of what he said. Sometimes it sounded like _A rookery_;
sometimes like one thing, sometimes like another. So I takes the
roadbook, and looks it out, and it looked something like A rasher, only
not right spelt. So, thinks I, they'll call it _A rasher_, because there
is good bacon here; and I asked the man if they were famous for pigs;
and he said, no, they got all their pigs from the manufactory in
Glasgow, and that they weren't famous for any thing but fresh herrings,
as are catched in that black Loch-Lomond, where they wanted me to go.'

'Kate,' said Mr Jones, setting down his tea-cup, and settling his hands
upon his knees, 'you know I think you're wrong about them herrings.' 'Mr
Jones,' returned the lady, with a look that shewed that the herrings had
been the subject of former altercation, 'for certain the waiter told me
that they came out of the loch, and to what purpose should he tell lies
about it.' 'I tells you, Kate, that herrings come out of the sea,' said
Mr Jones. 'Well, that loch is a great fresh water sea,' said Mrs Jones.
'Out of the salt sea,' insisted Mr Jones. 'Aye,' said Mrs Jones, 'them
salt herrings as we gets here, but it stands to reason, Mr Jones, that
the fresh herrings should come out of fresh water.' 'I say, cod is
fresh, and does'n't it come out of the sea? answer me that, Mrs Jones.'
'It is no wonder the cod is fresh,' returned the lady, 'when the
fishmongers keep fresh water running on it day and night.' 'Kate, it's
of no use argufying, I say herrings come out of the sea. What say you,
Sir?' turning to Captain Montreville. The Captain softened his verdict
in the gentleman's favour, by saying, that Mrs Jones was right in her
account of the waiter's report, though the man, in speaking of 'the
loch,' meant not Loch-Lomond, but an arm of the sea. 'I know'd it,' said
Mr Jones triumphantly, 'for haven't I read it in the newspaper as
Government offers a reward to any body that'll put most salt upon them
Scotch herrings, and is'n't that what makes the salt so dear?' So having
settled this knotty point to his own satisfaction, Mr Jones again
applied himself to his tea.

'Did you return to Glasgow by the way of Loch-Lomond?' inquired Captain
Montreville. 'Ay,' cried Mrs Jones, 'that was what the people of the inn
wanted us to do; but then I looked out, and seed a matter of forty of
them there savages, with the little petticoats and red and white
stockings, loitering and lolling about the inn-door, doing nothing in
the varsal world, except wait till it was dark to rob and murder us all,
bless us! So, thinks I, let me once get out from among you in a whole
skin, and catch me in the Highlands again; so as soon as the chaise
could be got, we just went the way we came.' 'Did you find good
accommodation in Glasgow,' said the Captain. 'Yes,' replied Mrs Jones;
'but after all, Captain, there's no country like our own;--do you know,
I never got so much as a buttered muffin all the while I was in
Scotland?'

The conversation was here interrupted by an exclamation from Mrs
Dawkins, who, knowing that she had nothing new to expect in her
daughter's memoirs of her Scotish excursion, had continued to talk with
Laura apart. 'Goodness me!' she cried, 'why Kate, as sure as eggs,
here's Miss never seed a play in all her life!' 'Never saw a play! Never
saw a play!' exclaimed the landlord and landlady at once. 'Well, that's
so odd; but to be sure, poor soul, how should she, among them there
hills.' 'Suppose,' said Mrs Jones, 'we should make a party, and go
tonight.--We shall be just in time.' Laura was desirous to go: her
father made no objection; and Mr Jones, with that feeling of
good-natured self-complacency which most people have experienced,
arising from the discovery that another is new to a pleasure with which
he himself is familiar, offered, as he expressed it, 'to do the genteel
thing, and treat her himself.'

The party was speedily arranged, and Laura soon found herself seated in
the pit of the theatre. The scene was quite new to her; for her
ignorance of public places was even greater than her companions had
discovered it to be. She was dazzled with the glare of the lights, and
the brilliancy of the company, and confused with the murmur of
innumerable voices; but the curtain rose, and her attention was soon
confined to the stage. The play was the Gamester, the most domestic of
our tragedies; and, in the inimitable representation of Mrs Beverly,
Laura found an illusion strong enough to absorb for the time every
faculty of her soul. Of the actress she thought not; but she loved and
pitied Mrs Beverly with a fervour that made her insensible to the
amusement which she afforded to her companions. Meanwhile her
countenance, as beautiful, almost as expressive, followed every change
in that of Mrs Siddons. She wept with her; listened, started, rejoiced
with her; and when Mrs Beverly repulsed the villain Stukely, Laura's
eyes too flashed with 'heaven's own lightnings.' By the time the
representation was ended, she was so much exhausted by the strength and
rapidity of her emotions, that she was scarcely able to answer to the
questions of 'How have you been amused?' and 'How did you like it?' with
which her companions all at once assailed her. 'Well,' said Miss Julia,
when they were arrived at home, 'I think nothing is so delightful as a
play. I should like to go every night--shouldn't you?' 'No,' answered
Laura. 'Once or twice in a year would be quite sufficient for me. It
occupies my thoughts too much for a mere amusement.'

In the course of the two following days, Laura had sketched more than
twenty heads of Mrs Siddons, besides completing the preparations for her
journey to Scotland. On the third, the Captain, who could now smile at
his own imaginary debility, prepared to carry the bond to receive Mr
Warren's signature. The fourth was to be spent with Mrs De Courcy; and
on the morning of the fifth, the travellers intended to depart.

On the appointed morning, Captain Montreville set out on an early visit
to Portland Street, gaily telling his daughter at parting that he would
return in an hour or two, with her dowery in his pocket. When he knocked
at Mr Warren's door, the servant informed him that his master had gone
out, but that expecting the Captain to call, he had left a message to
beg that Montreville would wait till he returned, which would be very
soon.

The Captain was then shewn into a back parlour, where he endeavoured to
amuse himself with some books that were scattered round the room. They
consisted of amatory poems and loose novels, and one by one he threw
them aside in disgust, lamenting that one who was capable of a kind and
generous action should seek pleasure in such debasing studies. The room
was hung with prints and pictures, but they partook of the same
licentious character; and Montreville shuddered, as the momentary
thought darted across his mind, that it was strange that the charms of
Laura had made no impression on one whose libertinism in regard to her
sex was so apparent. It was but momentary. 'No!' thought he, 'her purity
would awe the most licentious; and I am uncandid, ungrateful, to harbour
even for a moment such an idea of the man who has acted towards her and
me with the most disinterested benevolence.'

He waited long, but Warren did not appear; and he began to blame himself
for having neglected to fix the exact time of his visit. To remedy this
omission, he rang for writing materials, and telling the servant that he
could stay no longer, left a note to inform Mr Warren that he would wait
upon him at twelve o'clock next day. The servant, who was Mr Warren's
own valet, seemed unwilling to allow the Captain to depart, and assured
him that he expected his master every minute; but Montreville, who knew
that there was no depending upon the motions of a mere man of pleasure,
would be detained no longer.

He returned home, and finding the parlour empty, was leaving it to seek
Laura in her painting-room, when he observed a letter lying on the
table addressed to himself. The hand-writing was new to him. He opened
it--the signature was equally so. The contents were as follows:--

       'Sir,

     The writer of this letter is even by name a stranger to you. If
     this circumstance should induce you to discredit my
     information, I offer no proof of my veracity but this simple
     one, that obviously no selfish end can be served by my present
     interference. Of the force of my motive you cannot judge,
     unless you have yourself lured to destruction the heart that
     trusted you,--seen it refuse all comfort,--reject all
     reparation,--and sink at last in untimely decay. From a fate
     like this, though not softened like this by anxious tenderness,
     nor mourned like this by remorseless pity, but aggravated by
     being endured for one incapable of any tender or generous
     feeling, it is my purpose, Sir, to save your daughter. I was
     last night one of a party where her name was mentioned;--where
     she was described as lovely, innocent, and respectable; yet the
     person who so described her, scrupled not to boast of a plan
     for her destruction. In the hope (why should I pretend a better
     motive) of softening the pangs of late but bitter
     self-reproach, by saving one fellow-creature from perhaps
     reluctant ruin, one family from domestic shame, I drew from him
     your address, and learnt that to ingratiate himself with you,
     and with his intended victim, he has pretended to offer as a
     gift, what he knew that he could not long withhold. He means to
     take the earliest opportunity of inveigling her from your care,
     secure, as he boasts, of her pardon in her attachment. Ill,
     indeed, does her character, even as described by him, accord
     with such a boast; yet even indifference might prove no guard
     against fraud, which, thus warned, you may defy. A fear that my
     intention should be frustrated by the merited contempt attached
     to anonymous information, inclines me to add my name, though
     aware that it can claim no authority with a stranger.

      'I am, SIR,
        'Your obedient Servant,
            'PHILIP WILMOT.'

Captain Montreville read this letter more than once. It bore marks of
such sincerity that he knew not how to doubt of the intelligence it
gave; and he perceived with dismay, that the business which he had
considered as closed, was as far as ever from a conclusion; for how
could he accept a favour which he had been warned to consider as the
wages of dishonour. For Laura he had indeed no fear. She was no less
safe in her own virtue and discretion, than in the contemptuous pity
with which she regarded Warren. This letter would put her upon her guard
against leaving the house with him, which Captain Montreville now
recollected that he had often solicited her to do, upon pretence of
taking the air in his curricle.

But must he still linger in London; still be cheated with vain hopes;
still fear for the future subsistence of his child; still approach the
very verge of poverty; perhaps be obliged to defend his rights by a
tedious law-suit? His heart sank at the prospect, and he threw himself
on a seat, disconsolate and cheerless.

He had long been in the habit of seeking relief from every painful
feeling in the tenderness of Laura,--of finding in her enduring spirit a
support to the weakness of his own; and he now sought her in the
conviction that she would either discover some advantage to be drawn
from this disappointment, or lighten it to him by her affectionate
sympathy. He knocked at the door.--She did not answer. He called
her.--All was silent. He rang the bell, and inquired whether she was
below, and was answered that she had gone out with Mr Warren in his
curricle two hours before. The unfortunate father heard no more. Wildly
striking his hand upon his breast, 'She is lost!' he cried, and sunk to
the ground. The blood burst violently from his mouth and nostrils, and
he became insensible.

The family were soon assembled round him; and a surgeon being procured,
he declared that Montreville had burst a blood vessel, and that nothing
but the utmost care and quiet could save his life. Mrs Dawkins, with
great humanity, attended him herself, venting in whispers to the surgeon
her compassion for Montreville, and her indignation against the
unnatural desertion of Laura, whom she abused as a methodistical
hypocrite, against whom her wrath was the stronger because she could
never have suspected her.

Montreville no sooner returned to recollection, than he declared his
resolution instantly to set off in search of his child. In vain did the
surgeon expostulate, and assure him that his life would be the forfeit:
his only answer was, 'Why should I live? She is lost.' In pursuance of
his design, he tried to rise from the bed on which he had been laid; but
exhausted nature refused to second him, and again he sunk back
insensible.

When Montreville called in Portland Street, the servant had deceived him
in saying that Warren was not at home. He was not only in the house,
but expected the Captain's visit, and prepared to take advantage of it,
for the accomplishment of the honourable scheme of which he had boasted
to his associates. As soon, therefore, as the servant had disposed of
Montreville, Warren mounted his curricle, which was in waiting at a
little distance, and driving to Mrs Dawkins's, informed Laura that he
had been sent to her by her father, who proposed carrying her to see the
British Museum, and for that purpose was waiting her arrival in Portland
Street. Entirely unsuspicious of any design, Laura accompanied him
without hesitation; and though Portland Street appeared to her greatly
more distant than she had imagined it, it was not till having taken
innumerable turns, she found herself in an open road, that she began to
suspect her conductor of having deceived her.

'Whither have you taken me, Mr Warren?' she inquired: 'This road does
not lead to Portland Street.' 'Oh yes, it does,' answered Warren, 'only
the road is a little circuitous.' 'Let us immediately return to the
straight one then,' said Laura. 'My father will be alarmed, and conclude
that some accident has happened to us.' 'Surely, my charming Miss
Montreville,' said Warren, still continuing to drive on, 'you do not
fear to trust yourself with me.' 'Fear _you_!' repeated Laura, with
involuntary disdain. 'No, but I am at a loss to guess what has
encouraged you to make me the companion of so silly a frolic. I suppose
you mean this for an ingenious joke upon my father.' 'No, 'pon my soul,'
said the beau, a little alarmed by the sternness of her manner, 'I meant
nothing but to have an opportunity of telling you that I am quite in
love with you,--dying for you,--faith I am.' 'You should first have
ascertained,' answered Laura, 'whether I was likely to think the secret
worth a hearing. I desire you will instantly return.'

The perfect composure of Laura's look and manner (for feeling no alarm
she shewed none) made Warren conclude that she was not averse to being
detained; and he thought it only necessary that he should continue to
make love, to induce her quietly to submit to go on for another half
mile, which would bring them to a place where he thought she would be
secure. He began, therefore, to act the lover with all the energy he
could muster; but Laura interrupted him. 'It is a pity,' said she, with
a smile of calm contempt, 'to put a stop to such well-timed gallantry,
which is indeed just such as I should have expected from Mr Warren's
sense and delicacy. But I would not for the sake of Mr Warren's
raptures, nor all else that he has to offer, give my father the most
momentary pain, and therefore if you do not suffer me to alight this
instant, I shall be obliged to claim the assistance of passengers on an
occasion very little worthy of their notice.' Her contumelious manner
entirely undeceived her companion in regard to her sentiments; but it
had no other effect upon him, except that of adding revenge to the
number of his incitements; and perceiving that they were now at a short
distance from the house whither he intended to convey her, he continued
to pursue his way.

Laura now rose from her seat, and seizing the reins with a force that
made the horses rear, she coolly chose that moment to spring from the
curricle; and walked back towards the town, leaving her inammorato in
the utmost astonishment at her self-possession, as well as rage at her
disdainful treatment.

She proceeded till she came to a decent-looking shop, where she entered;
and, begging permission to sit down, dispatched one of the shop-boys in
search of a hackney-coach. A carriage was soon procured, and Laura,
concluding that her father, tired of waiting for her, must have left
Portland Street, desired to be driven directly home.

As she entered the house, she was met by Mrs Dawkins. 'So Miss,' cried
she, 'you have made a fine spot of work on't. You have murdered your
father.' 'Good heavens!' cried Laura, turning as pale as death, 'what is
it you mean? where is my father?' 'Your father is on his deathbed Miss,
and you may thank your morning rides for it. Thinking you were off, he
burst a blood-vessel in the fright, and the doctor says, the least stir
in the world will finish him.'

Laura turned sick to death. Cold drops stood upon her forehead; and she
shook in every limb. She made an instinctive attempt to ascend the
stair; but her strength failed her, and she sunk upon the steps. The
sight of her agony changed in a moment Mrs Dawkins's indignation to
pity. 'Don't take on so, Miss,' said she, 'to be sure you didn't mean
it. If he is kept quiet, he may mend still, and now that you're come
back too.--By the bye, I may as well run up and tell him.' 'Oh stop!'
cried Laura, reviving at once in the sudden dread that such incautious
news would destroy her father, 'Stay,' said she, pressing with one hand
her bursting forehead, while with the other she detained Mrs
Dawkins.--'Let me think, that we may not agitate him. Oh no! I cannot
think;' and leaning her head on Mrs Dawkins' shoulder, she burst into an
agony of tears.

These salutary tears restored her recollection, and she inquired
whether the surgeon, of whom Mrs Dawkins had spoken, was still in the
house. Being answered, that he was in Montreville's apartment, she sent
to beg that he would speak with her. He came, and she entreated him to
inform her father, with the caution which his situation required, that
she was returned and safe. She followed him to the door of Montreville's
apartment, and stood listening in trembling expectation to every thing
that stirred within. At last she received the wished-for summons. She
entered; she sprang towards the bed. 'My child!' cried Montreville, and
he clasped her to his bosom, and sobbed aloud. When he was able to
speak, 'Oh Laura,' said he, 'tell me again that you are safe, and say by
what miracle, by what unheard-of mercy, you have escaped.' 'Compose
yourself, my dearest father, for Heaven's sake,' cried Laura. 'I am
indeed safe, and never have been in danger. When Warren found that I
refused to join in his frolic, he did not attempt to prevent me from
returning home.' She then briefly related the affair as it had appeared
to her, suppressing Warren's rhapsodies, from the fear of irritating her
father; and he, perceiving that she considered the whole as a frolic,
frivolous in its intention, though dreadful in its effects, suffered her
to remain in that persuasion. She passed the night by his bed-side,
devoting every moment of his disturbed repose to fervent prayers for his
recovery.




CHAPTER XIV


From feverish and interrupted sleep, Montreville awoke unrefreshed; and
the surgeon, when he repeated his visit, again alarmed Laura with
representations of her father's danger, and assurances that nothing but
the most vigilant attention to his quiet could preserve his life. The
anguish with which Laura listened to this sentence she suppressed, lest
it should injure her father. She never approached him but to bring
comfort; she spoke to him cheerfully, while the tears forced themselves
to her eyes; and smiled upon him while her heart was breaking. She felt
what he must suffer, should the thought occur to him that he was about
to leave her to the world, unfriended and alone; and she never mentioned
his illness to him unless with the voice of hope. But of the danger
which she strove to disguise, Montreville was fully sensible; and though
he forbore to shock her by avowing it explicitly, he could not, like
her, suppress his fears. He would sometimes fervently wish that he could
see his child safe in the protection of Mrs Douglas; and sometimes, when
Laura was bending over him in the tenderest sympathy, he would clasp her
neck, and cry, with an agony that shook his whole frame, 'What--Oh what
will become of thee!'

He seemed anxious to know how long Mrs De Courcy was to remain in town,
and inquired every hour whether Montague was not returned. Full well did
Laura guess the mournful meaning of these questions. Full well did they
remind her, that when the De Courcy family left London, she with her
dying father would amidst this populous wilderness be alone. She
anticipated the last scene of this sad tragedy; when, amidst busy
thousands, a senseless corpse would be her sole companion. She looked
forward to its close, when even this sad society would be withdrawn.
Human fortitude could not support the prospect; and she would rush from
her father's presence, to give vent to agonies of sorrow.

But the piety of Laura could half-invest misfortune with the character
of blessing; as the mists that rise to darken the evening sun are
themselves tinged with his glory. She called to mind the gracious
assurance which marks the afflicted who suffer not by their own guilt or
folly as the favoured of Heaven; and the more her earthly connections
seemed dissolving, the more did she strive to acquaint herself with Him,
from whose care no accident can sever. To this care she fervently
committed her father; praying that no selfish indulgence of her grief
might embitter his departure; and resolving by her fortitude to convince
him that she was able to struggle with the storm from which he was no
longer to shelter her.

The day succeeding that on which Montreville was taken ill had been set
apart for a farewell visit to Mrs De Courcy; and Laura's note of
mournful apology, was answered by a kind visit from Harriet. Unconscious
of the chief cause of her father's impatience for Montague's return,
Laura wishing to be the bearer of intelligence which she knew would
cheer him, inquired anxiously when Miss De Courcy expected her brother.
But De Courcy's motions depended upon the spirits of his venerable
friend, and Harriet knew not when he might be able to leave Mr
Wentworth. It was even uncertain whether for the present he would return
to town at all, as in another week Mrs De Courcy meant to set out for
Norwood. Laura softened this unpleasing news to her father; she did not
name the particular time of Mrs De Courcy's departure, and she suffered
him still confidently to expect the return of his favourite.

The next day brought a letter from De Courcy himself, full of
affectionate solicitude for the Captain's health and spirits; but
evidently written in ignorance of the fatal change that had taken place
since his departure. In this letter the name of Laura was not mentioned,
not even in a common compliment, and Montreville remarked to her this
omission. 'He has forgotten it,' answered Laura,--'his warm heart is
full of his friend's distress and yours, and has not room for more
ceremony.' 'I hope,' said Montreville, emphatically, 'that is not the
reason.' 'What is then the reason?' inquired Laura; but Montreville did
not speak, and she thought no more of De Courcy's little omission.

Her father, indeed, for the present, occupied almost all her earthly
thoughts, and even her prayers rose more frequently for him than for
herself. Except during the visits of Montreville's surgeon, she was
Montreville's sole attendant; and, regardless of fatigue, she passed
every night by his bed-side, every day in ministering to his comfort.
If, worn out with watching, she dropt asleep, she started again at his
slightest motion, and obstinately refused to seek in her own chamber a
less interrupted repose. 'No,' thought she, 'let my strength serve me
while I have duties to perform, while my father lives to need my
efforts; then may I be permitted to sink to early rest, and the weary
labourer, while yet it is but mornings be called to receive his hire.'

The desertion of Hargrave, whom she had loved with all the ardour of a
warm heart and a fervid imagination, the death of her father so fast
approaching, her separation from every living being with whom she could
claim friendship or kindred, seemed signals for her to withdraw her
affections from a world where she would soon have nothing left to love
or to cherish. 'And be it so,' thought she,--'let me no longer grovel
here in search of objects which earth has not to offer--objects fitted
for unbounded and unchangeable regard. Nor let me peevishly reject what
this world really has to give, the opportunity to prepare for a better.
This it bestows even on me; and a few childish baubles are all else that
it reserves for those who worship it with all their soul, and strength,
and mind.'

No mortal can exist without forming some wish or hope. Laura _hoped_
that she should live while she could be useful to her father; and she
_wished_ that she might not survive him. One only other wish she had,
and that was for De Courcy's return; for Montreville, whose spirits more
than shared his bodily languor, now seldom spoke, but to express his
longing for the presence of his favourite. Laura continued to cheer him
with a hope which she herself no longer felt; for now three days only
remained ere Mrs De Courcy was to quit London. The departure of their
friends Laura resolved to conceal from her father, that, believing them
to be near, he might feel himself the less forlorn; and this she thought
might be practicable, as he had never since his illness expressed any
wish to quit his bed, or to see Miss De Courcy when she came.

In Montreville's darkened apartment, without occupation but in her cares
for him, almost without rest, had Laura passed a week, when she was one
morning summoned from her melancholy charge, to attend a visitor. She
entered the parlour. 'Mr De Courcy!' she exclaimed, springing joyfully
to meet him, 'thank Heaven you are come!' But not with equal warmth did
De Courcy accost her. The repulsive look she had given him at parting
was still fresh in his recollection; and, with a respectful distant bow,
he expressed his sorrow for Captain Montreville's illness. 'Oh he is
ill, indeed!' said Laura, the faint hectic of pleasure fading suddenly
from her cheek. 'Earnestly has he longed for your return; and we
feared,' said she, with a violent effort suppressing her tears, 'we
feared that you might not have come till--till all was over.' 'Surely
Miss Montreville,' said De Courcy, extremely shocked, 'surely you are
causelessly alarmed.' 'Oh no,' cried Laura, 'he cannot live!' and no
longer able to contain her emotion, she burst into a passion of tears.
Forced entirely from his guard by her grief, Montague threw himself on
the seat beside her. 'Dearest of human beings,' he exclaimed, 'Oh that I
could shield thee from every sorrow!' But absorbed in her distress,
Laura heeded him not; and the next moment, sensible of his imprudence,
he started from her side, and retreated to a distant part of the room.

As soon as she was again able to command herself, she went to inform her
father of De Courcy's arrival. Though told with the gentlest caution,
Montreville heard the news with extreme emotion. He grasped Laura's
hand; and, with tears of joy streaming down his pale cheeks,
said,--'Heaven be praised! I shall not leave thee quite desolate.' Laura
herself felt less desolate and she rejoiced even for herself, when she
once more saw De Courcy seated beside her father.

It was only the morning before, that a letter from Harriet had informed
her brother of Montreville's illness and of Laura's distress. To hear of
that distress, and to remain at a distance was impossible; and Montague
had left Mr Wentworth's within the hour. He had travelled all night;
and, without even seeing his mother and sister, had come directly to
Captain Montreville's lodgings. He was shocked at the death-like looks
of Montreville, and still more at those of Laura. Her eyes were sunk,
her lips colourless, and her whole appearance indicated that she was
worn out with fatigue and wretchedness. Yet De Courcy felt, that never
in the bloom of health and beauty, had she been so dear to him, and
scarcely could he forbear from addressing her in the accents of
compassion and love. Montreville wishing to speak with him alone, begged
of Laura to leave him for a while to De Courcy's care, and endeavour to
take some rest. She objected that Montague had himself need of rest,
having travelled all night; but when he assured her, that even if she
drove him away he would not attempt to sleep, she consented to retire,
and seek the repose of which she was so much in want.

When they were alone, Montreville shewed De Courcy the warning letter;
and related to him the baseness of Warren and Laura's escape. Montague
listened to him with intense interest. He often changed colour, and his
lips quivered with emotion; and, when her father described the manner in
which she had accomplished her escape, he exclaimed with enthusiasm,
'Yes, she is superior to every weakness, as she is alive to every gentle
feeling.' Montreville then dwelt upon her unremitting care of him--on
the fortitude with which she suppressed her sorrow, even while its
violence was perceptibly injuring her health. 'And is it to be wondered
at,' said he, 'that I look forward with horror to leaving this lovely
excellent creature in such a world, alone and friendless?' 'She shall
never be friendless,' cried De Courcy. 'My mother, my sister, shall be
her friends, and I will'--He stopped abruptly, and a heavy sigh burst
from him.

Recovering himself, he resumed, 'You must not talk so despondingly. You
will live long, I trust, to enjoy the blessing of such a child.'
Montreville shook his head, and remained silent. He was persuaded that
De Courcy loved his daughter, and would fain have heard an explicit
avowal that he did. To have secured to her the protection of Montague
would have destroyed the bitterness of death. Had Laura been the heiress
of millions, he would have rejoiced to bestow her and them upon De
Courcy. But he scorned to force him to a declaration, and respected her
too much to make an approach towards offering her to any man's
acceptance.

He was at a loss to imagine what reason withheld De Courcy from avowing
an attachment which he was convinced that he felt. When he considered
his favourite's grave reflecting character, he was rather inclined to
believe that he was cautiously ascertaining the temper and habits of the
woman with whom he meant to spend his life. But the warmth of
approbation with which he mentioned Laura, seemed to indicate that his
opinion of her was already fixed. It was possible, too, that De Courcy
wished to secure an interest in her regard before he ventured formally
to petition for it. Whatever was the cause of Montague's silence, the
Captain anticipated the happiest consequences from his renewed
intercourse with Laura; and he resolved that he would not, by any
indelicate interference, compel him to precipitate his declaration. He
therefore changed the conversation, by inquiring when Mrs De Courcy was
to leave town. Montague answered, that as he had not seen his mother
since his return, he did not exactly know what time was fixed for her
departure: 'but,' said he, 'whenever she goes, I shall only attend her
to Norwood, and return on the instant; nor will I quit you again, till
you are much, much better, or till you will no longer suffer me to
stay.' Montreville received this promise with gratitude and joy; and De
Courcy persuaded himself, that in making it, he was actuated chiefly by
motives of friendship and humanity. He remained with Montreville till
the day was far advanced, and then went to take a late dinner in Audley
Street.

Next morning, and for several succeeding days, he returned, and spent
the greatest part of his time in attending, comforting, and amusing the
invalid. He prevailed on his mother to delay her departure, that he
might not be obliged immediately to leave his charge. He soothed the
little impatiences of disease; contrived means to mitigate the
oppressiveness of debility; knew how to exhilarate the hour of ease; and
watched the moment, well known to the sickly, when amusement becomes
fatigue.

Laura repaid these attentions to her father with gratitude unutterable.
Often did she wish to thank De Courcy as he deserved; but she felt that
her acknowledgements must fall far short of her feelings and of his
deserts, if they were not made with a warmth, which to a man, and to a
young man, she revolted from expressing. She imagined, too, that to one
who sought for friendship, mere gratitude might be mortifying; and that
it might wound the generous nature of Montague to be thanked as a
benefactor, where he wished to be loved as an equal. She therefore did
not speak of, or but slightly mentioned, her own and her father's
obligations to him; but she strove to repay them in the way that would
have been most acceptable to herself, by every mark of confidence and
good will. Here no timidity restrained her; for no feeling that could
excite timidity at all mingled with her regard for De Courcy. But,
confined to her own breast, her gratitude became the stronger; and if
she had now had a heart to give, to Montague it would have been freely
given.

Meanwhile the spirits of Montreville lightened of a heavy load, by the
assurance that, even in case of his death, his daughter would have a
friend to comfort and protect her, his health began to improve. He was
able to rise; and one day, with the assistance of Montague's arm,
surprised Laura with a visit in the parlour. The heart of Laura swelled
with transport when she saw him once more occupy his accustomed seat in
the family-room, and received him as one returned from the grave. She
sat by him, holding his hand between her own, but did not try to speak.
'If it would not make you jealous, Laura,' said Montreville, 'I should
tell you that Mr De Courcy is a better nurse than you are. I have
recruited wonderfully since he undertook the care of me. More indeed
than I thought I should ever have done.' Laura answered only by glancing
upon De Courcy a look of heartfelt benevolence and pleasure. 'And yet,'
said Montague, 'it is alleged that no attentions from our own sex are so
effectual as those which we receive from the other. How cheaply would
bodily suffering purchase the sympathy, the endearments of'--the name of
Laura rose to his lips, but he suppressed it, and changed the expression
to 'an amiable woman.' 'Is it indeed so?' cried Laura, raising her eyes
full of grateful tears to his face. 'Oh then, if sickness or sorrow must
be your portion, may your kindness here be repaid by some spirit of
peace in woman's form--some gentleness yet more feminine than De
Courcy's!'

The enthusiasm and gratitude had hurried Laura into a warmth which the
next moment covered her with confusion; and she withdrew her eyes from
De Courcy's face before she had time to remark the effect of these, the
first words of emotion that ever she had addressed to him. The transport
excited by the ardour of her expressions, and the cordial approbation
which they implied, instantly gave way to extreme mortification. 'She
wishes,' thought he, 'that some _woman_ may repay me. She would then,
not only with indifference, but with pleasure, see me united to another;
resign me without a pang to some mere common-place insipid piece of
sweetness; and give her noble self to one who could better feel her
value.'

De Courcy had never declared his preference for Laura; he was even
determined not to declare it. Yet to find that she had not even a wish
to secure it for herself, gave him such acute vexation, that he was
unable to remain in her presence. He abruptly rose and took his leave.
He soon however reproached himself with the unreasonableness of his
feelings; and returned to his oft-repeated resolution to cultivate the
friendship without aspiring to the love of Laura. He even persuaded
himself that he rejoiced in her freedom from a passion which could not
be gratified without a sacrifice of the most important duties. He had a
sister for whom no provision had been made; a mother, worthy of his
warmest affection, whose increasing infirmities required increased
indulgence. Mrs De Courcy's jointure was a very small one; and though
she consented for the present to share the comforts of his
establishment, Montague knew her too well to imagine that she would
accept of any addition to her income, deducted from the necessary
expences of his wife and family. His generous nature revolted from
suffering his sister to feel herself a mere pensioner on his bounty, or
to seek dear-bought independence in a marriage of convenience, a sort of
bargain upon which he looked with double aversion, since he had himself
felt the power of an exclusive attachment.

Here even his sense of justice was concerned; for he knew that, if his
father had lived, it was his intention to have saved from his income a
provision for Harriet. From the time that the estate devolved to
Montague, he had begun to execute his father's intention; and he had
resolved, that no selfish purpose should interfere with its fulfilment.
The destined sum, however, was as yet little more than half collected,
and it was now likely to accumulate still more slowly; for, as Mrs De
Courcy had almost entirely lost the use of her limbs, a carriage was to
her an absolute necessary of life.

Most joyfully would Montague have sacrificed every luxury, undergone
every privation, to secure the possession of Laura; but he would not
sacrifice his mother's health nor his sister's independence to any
selfish gratification; nor would he subject the woman of his choice to
the endless embarrassments of a revenue too small for its purposes.

These reasons had determined him against addressing Laura. At their
first interview he had been struck with her as the most lovely woman he
had ever beheld; but he was in no fear that his affections should be
entangled. They had escaped from a hundred lovely women, who had done
their utmost to ensnare them, while she was evidently void of any such
design. Besides, Montreville was his old friend, and it was quite
necessary that he should visit him. Laura's manners had charmed De
Courcy as much as her person. Still might not a man be pleased and
entertained, without being in love? Further acquaintance gradually laid
open to him the great and amiable qualities of her mind, and was it not
natural and proper to love virtue? but this was not being in love.

Symptoms at last grew so strong upon poor De Courcy, that he could no
longer disguise them from himself; but it was pleasing to love
excellence. He would never reveal his passion. It should be the secret
joy of his heart; and why cast away a treasure which he might enjoy
without injury to any? Laura's love indeed he could not seek; but her
friendship he might cherish; and who would exchange the friendship of
such a woman for the silly fondness of a thousand vulgar minds?

In this pursuit he had all the success that he could desire; for Laura
treated him with undisguised regard; and with that regard he assured
himself that he should be satisfied. At last this 'secret joy,' this
'treasure of his heart' began to mingle pain with its pleasures; and,
when called away on his mournful errand to Mr Wentworth, De Courcy
confessed, that it was wise to wean himself a little from one whose
presence was becoming necessary to his happiness, and to put some
restraint upon a passion, which from his toy was become his master.
Short absence, however, had only increased his malady; and Laura in
sorrow, Laura grateful, confiding, at times almost tender, seized at
once upon every avenue to the heart of De Courcy: he revered her as the
best, he admired her as the loveliest, he loved her as the most amiable
of human beings. Still he resolved that, whatever it might cost him, he
would refrain from all attempt to gain her love; and he began to draw
nice distinctions between the _very tender_ friendship with which he
hoped to inspire her, and the tormenting passion which he must silently
endure. Happily for the success of De Courcy's self-deceit, there was no
rival at hand, with whose progress in Laura's regard he could measure
his own, and he never thought of asking himself what would be his
sensations if her _very tender_ friendship for him should not exclude
love for another.

A doubt would sometimes occur to him, as to the prudence of exposing
himself to the unremitting influence of her charms, but it was quickly
banished as an unwelcome intruder, or silenced with the plea, that, to
withdraw himself from Montreville on a sick-bed, would outrage
friendship and humanity. He had, too, somewhat inadvertently, given his
friend a promise that he would not leave him till his health was a
little re-established; and this promise now served as the excuse for an
indulgence which he had not resolution to forego. After escorting Mrs De
Courcy to Norwood, he pleaded this promise to himself when he returned
to London without an hour's delay; and it excused him in his own eyes
for going every morning to the abode of Montreville, from whence, till
the return of night drove him away, he had seldom the resolution to
depart.

Meanwhile, with the health of her father, the spirits of Laura revived;
and considering it as an act of the highest self-denial in a domestic
man to quit his home--a literary man to suspend his studies--a young man
to become stationary in the apartment of an invalid, she exerted herself
to the utmost to cheer De Courcy's voluntary task. She sometimes
relieved him in reading aloud, an accomplishment in which she excelled.
Her pronunciation was correct, her voice varied, powerful, and
melodious, her conception rapid and accurate, while the expression of
her countenance was an animated comment upon the author.

De Courcy delighted to hear her sing the wild airs of her native
mountains, which she did with inimitable pathos, though without skill.
Her conversation, sometimes literary, sometimes gay, was always simply
intended to please. Yet, though void of all design to dazzle, it
happened, she knew not how, that in De Courcy's company she was always
more lively, more acute, than at other times. His remarks seemed to
unlock new stores in her mind; and the train of thought which he
introduced, she could always follow with peculiar ease and pleasure.
Safe in her preference for another, she treated him with the most
cordial frankness. Utterly unconscious of the sentiment she inspired,
she yet had an animating confidence in De Courcy's good will; and
sometimes pleased herself with thinking, that, next to his mother and
sister, she stood highest of women in his regard. No arts of the most
refined coquetry could have rivetted more closely the chains of the
ill-fated De Courcy; and the gratitude of the unconscious Laura, pointed
the shaft that gave the death wound to his peace.

How was it possible for her to imagine, that the same sentiment could
produce a demeanour so opposite as De Courcy's was from that of
Hargrave. Hargrave had been accustomed to speak of her personal charms
with rapture. De Courcy had never made them the subject of direct
compliment; he had even of late wholly discontinued those little
gallantries which every pretty woman is accustomed to receive. Hargrave
omitted no opportunity to plead his passion; and though the presence of
a third person of necessity precluded this topic, it restrained him not
from gazing upon Laura with an eagerness from which she shrunk abashed.
De Courcy had never mentioned love; and Laura observed that, when his
glance met her's, he would sometimes withdraw his eye with (as she
thought) almost womanly modesty. In her private interviews with
Hargrave, he had ever approached her with as much vehemence and freedom
of speech and manner, as her calm dignity would permit. Privacy made no
change in De Courcy's manner, except to render him a little more
silent--a little more distant; and to personal familiarity, he seemed to
be if possible more averse than herself; for if she accidentally touched
him, he coloured and drew back.

Some of these circumstances Montreville had remarked, and had drawn from
them inferences very different from those of his daughter. He was
convinced that the preference of De Courcy for Laura had risen into a
passion, which, for some unknown reason, he wished to conceal; and he
perceived, by the ease of her behaviour, that Montague's secret was
unsuspected by her. Most anxiously did he wish to know the cause of his
favourite's silence, and to discover whether it was likely to operate
long. In Laura's absence, he sometimes led the conversation towards the
subject; but De Courcy never improved the offered opportunity. Partly in
the hope of inviting equal frankness, Montreville talked of his own
situation, and mentioned the motive of his journey to London. Montague
inquired into every particular of the business, and rested not till he
had found Mr Baynard's executor, and received from him an
acknowledgement, that he had in his possession a voucher for the payment
of Montreville's fifteen hundred pounds to Warren.

He next, without mentioned the matter to the Captain, called upon
Warren, with an intention finally to conclude the business; thinking it
impossible that, since the payment of the money was ascertained, he
could refuse either to pay the annuity, or refund the price of it. But
the disdain of Laura yet rankled in the mind of Warren, and he
positively refused to bring the affair to any conclusion, declaring,
that he would litigate it to the last sixpence he was worth; to which
declaration he added an excellent joke concerning the union of Scotch
pride with Scotch poverty. At this effrontery the honest blood of De
Courcy boiled with indignation, and he was on the point of vowing, that
he too would beggar himself, rather than permit such infamous
oppression; but his mother, his sister, and Laura herself, rose to his
mind, and he contented himself with threatening to expose Warren to the
disgrace that he merited.

Warren now began to suspect that De Courcy was the cause of Laura's
contemptuous reception of his addresses, and, enraged at his
interference, yet overawed by his manly appearance and decided manner,
became sullen, and refused to answer Montague's expostulations. Nothing
remained to be done, and De Courcy was obliged to communicate to
Montreville the ill success of his negotiations.

Bereft of all hope of obtaining justice, which he had not the means to
enforce, Montreville became more anxiously desirous to regain such a
degree of health as might enable him to return home. In his present
state, such a journey was impracticable, and he was convinced, that
while he remained pent up in the polluted air of the city, his recovery
could advance but slowly. Some weeks must at all events elapse before he
could be in a condition to travel; and to accommodate his funds to this
prolonged demand upon them, he saw that he must have recourse to some
scheme of economy yet more humble than that which he had adopted.

He hoped, if he could recover strength sufficient for the search, to
find in the suburbs some abode of purer air, and still more moderate
expense than his present habitation. The former only of these motives he
mentioned to De Courcy; for though Montreville did not affect to be
rich, he never spoke of his poverty. Various circumstances, however, had
led De Courcy to guess at his friend's pecuniary embarrassment; and he
too had a motive which he did not avow, in the offer which he made to
secure a more healthful residence for Montreville.

Unwilling to describe the humble accommodation with which he meant to
content himself, or the limited price which he could afford to offer for
it, Montreville at first refused De Courcy's services; but they were
pressed upon him with such warmth, that he was obliged to submit, and
Montague lost no time in fulfilling his commission.

He soon discovered a situation that promised comfort. It was in the
outskirts of the town, a small flower-garden belonged to the house, the
apartments were airy and commodious, the furniture was handsome, and the
whole most finically neat. The rent, however, exceeded that of
Montreville's present lodgings; and De Courcy knew that this objection
would be insurmountable. That Laura should submit to the inelegancies of
a mean habitation, was what he could not bear to think of; and he
determined, by a friendly little artifice, to reconcile Montreville's
comfort with his economy. The surgeon had named two or three weeks as
the time likely to elapse before Montreville could commence his journey.
De Courcy paid in advance above half the rent of the apartments for a
month, charging the landlady to keep the real rent a secret from her
lodgers.

As far as the author of these memoirs has been able to learn, this was
the only artifice that ever Montague De Courcy practised in his life;
and it led, as artifices are wont to do, to consequences which the
contriver neither wished nor foresaw.

Much to his satisfaction, Montreville was soon settled in his new abode,
where De Courcy continued to be his daily visitor. A certain delicacy
prevented Laura from endeavouring to procure a reversal of her father's
decree, issued in a moment of peevishness, that she should paint no more
with a view to pecuniary reward. She felt that he had been wrong, and
she shrunk from reminding him of it, till her labours should again
become necessary. But, desirous to convey to Mrs De Courcy some token of
her remembrance and gratitude, she employed some of the hours which
Montague spent with her father, in labouring a picture which she
intended to send to Norwood. The subject was the choice of Hercules; and
to make her gift the more acceptable, she presented in the hero a
picture of De Courcy, while the form and countenance of Virtue, were
copied from the simple majesty of her own. The figure of Pleasure was a
fancied one, and it cost the fair artist unspeakable labour. She could
not pourtray what she would have shrunk from beholding--a female
voluptuary. Her draperies were always designed with the most chastened
decency; and, after all her toil, even the form of Pleasure came sober
and matronly from the hand of Laura.

Designing a little surprise for her friends, she had never mentioned
this picture to De Courcy; and as she daily stole some of the hours of
his visits to bestow upon it, it advanced rapidly. Montague bore these
absences with impatience; but Montreville, who knew how Laura was
employed, took no notice of them, and De Courcy durst not complain.

Three weeks had glided away since Montreville's removal to his new
lodgings, and he remained as much as ever anxious, and as much as ever
unable to guess the reason which induced De Courcy to conceal a passion
which evidently increased every day. He recollected that Montague had of
late never met Laura but in his presence, and he thought it natural that
the lover should wish to make his first application to his mistress
herself. He had an idea, that the picture might be made to assist the
denouement which he so ardently desired; and with this view he privately
gave orders that when next Mr De Courcy came he should be ushered into
the painting-room, which he knew would be empty, as Laura never quitted
him till De Courcy arrived to take her place.

Next morning accordingly Montague was shewn into the room which he had
himself destined for Laura, and, for that reason, supplied with many
little luxuries which belonged not to its original furniture. He looked
round with delight on the marks of her recent presence. There lay her
book open as she had quitted it, and the pencil with which she had
marked the margin. It was one which he himself had recommended, and he
thought it should ever be dear to him. On a table lay her port-folio and
drawing materials: in a corner stood her easel with the picture, over
which was thrown a shawl which he had seen her wear.

Not conceiving that she could have any desire to conceal her work, he
approached it, and, raising the cover, stood for a moment motionless
with surprise. The next, a thousand sensations, vague but delightful,
darted through his mind; but before he could give a shape or
distinctness to any one of them, the step approached that ever aroused
De Courcy to eager expectation, and letting drop the shawl, he flew
towards the door to receive Laura.

With rapture in his eyes, but confusion on his tongue, De Courcy paid
his compliments, and again turned towards the picture. Laura sprung
forward to prevent him from raising the covering. 'Is this forbidden,
then?' said he. 'Oh yes, indeed,' said Laura, blushing, 'you must not
look at it.' 'Can you be so mischievous,' cried De Courcy, a delighted
smile playing on his countenance, 'as to refuse me such a pleasure?' 'I
am sure,' said Laura, blushing again, and still more deeply, 'it could
give you no pleasure in its present state.' 'And I am sure,' said De
Courcy, ardently, 'it would give me more than I have language to
express.'

De Courcy's eagerness, and the consciousness of her own confusion, made
Laura now more unwilling that Montague should discover the cause of both
to be his own portrait, and actually trembling with emotion, she said,
putting her hand on the shawl to prevent him from raising it, 'Indeed I
cannot shew you this. There is my port-folio--look at any thing but
this.' 'And what inference may I draw as to the subject of a picture
that Miss Montreville will not shew to the most partial--the most
devoted of her friends?' 'Any inference,' replied Laura, still holding
the shawl, 'that friendship or charity will permit.' 'And must I not
remove this perverse little hand?' said De Courcy, laying his upon it;
for all prudence was forgotten in his present emotion. Laura, a little
offended at his perseverance, gravely withdrew her hand, and turned
away, saying, 'Since my wishes have no power, I shall make no other
trial of strength.' 'No power!' cried De Courcy, following her, 'they
have more force than a thousand arms.' 'Well,' said Laura, a little
surprised by his manner, but turning upon him a smile of gracious
reconciliation, 'your forbearance may hereafter be rewarded by a sight
of this important picture; but lest you should forfeit your recompense,
had we not better remove from temptation?'

She then led the way to the parlour, and De Courcy followed her in a
state of agitation that could not be concealed. He was absent and
restless. He often changed colour, seemed scarce sensible of what was
addressed to him, or began to reply, and the unfinished sentence died
upon his lips. At last, starting up, he pleaded sudden indisposition,
and was hurrying away. 'Do not go away ill and alone,' said Laura,
kindly detaining him. 'Walk round the garden--the fresh air will relieve
you.' 'No air will relieve me!' said De Courcy, in a voice of
wretchedness. 'What then can we do for you?' said Laura, with
affectionate earnestness. 'What can _you_ do for me!' cried De Courcy,
'Oh nothing, nothing but suffer me to go, while yet I have the power.'
He then wrung Montreville's hand, and uttering something which his
emotion made inarticulate, without venturing a glance towards Laura, he
quitted the house, and returned home in a state bordering on
distraction.

He shut himself up in his chamber to consider of his situation, if that
can be called consideration, which was but a conflict of tumultuous
feeling. That Laura should have painted his portrait in a group where it
held such a relation to her own; that she should keep it concealed in an
apartment exclusively appropriated to herself; her alarm lest he should
examine it; her confusion, which had at last risen to the most
distressing height, from the idea of what De Courcy might infer, should
he discover that his own portrait was the cause of so many blushes; the
confiding affectionate matter in which she treated him,--all conspired
to mislead De Courcy. He felt a conviction that he was beloved, and, in
spite of himself, the thought was rapture.

But what availed this discovery? Could he forget the justice of his
sister's claims, sacrifice to his selfish wishes the comfort of his
mother, or wed his half-worshipped Laura to the distresses of an
embarrassed fortune? 'Oh no,' he cried, 'let not my passions involve in
disaster all that I love.'

Or could he lay open to Laura his feelings and his situation, and sue
for her love, even while their union must be delayed. Her attachment, he
thought, was yet in its infancy, born of gratitude, fostered by
separation from other society, and, for the present, pleasing in its
sensations, and transient in its nature. But he thought her capable of a
love as fervent--as deep-rooted as that which she inspired; and should
he wilfully awaken in her peaceful breast the cravings of such a passion
as tortured his own; see her spirits, her vigour of mind, her
usefulness, perhaps her health, give way to the sickness of 'hope
deferred!' No,--rather let her return to the indifference in which he
found her. Or, should he shackle her with a promise, of which honour
might extort a reluctant fulfilment, after the affection that prompted
it was perhaps withdrawn from him? Or, should he linger on from day to
day in vain endeavours to conceal his affection, dishonourably sporting
with the tenderness of the woman he loved, his ill-suppressed feelings
every hour offering a hope which must every hour be disappointed? No!
the generous heart of De Courcy would sooner have suffered a thousand
deaths.

But could he return--could he see again this creature, now more than
ever dear to him, and stifle the fondness--the anguish that would rend
his bosom at parting? Impossible! He would see her no more. He would
tear at once from his heart every hope--every joy--and dare at once all
the wretchedness that awaited him. In an agony of desperation, he rang
for his servant, ordered his horses, and in an hour was on his way to
Norwood, with feelings which the criminal on the rack need not have
envied.




CHAPTER XV


The next morning, while Montreville and his daughter were expecting,
with some anxiety the arrival of their daily visitor, a note was brought
which De Courcy had left in Audley Street, to be delivered after his
departure. Though nearly illegible, from the agitation in which it was
written, it contained nothing but the simple information, that he had
been suddenly obliged to leave London. It assigned no reason for his
journey--it fixed no period for his absence; and Montreville endeavoured
to hope that his return would not be distant. But day after day passed
heavily on, and De Courcy came not. Montreville again began to feel
himself a solitary deserted being; again became dejected; again became
the victim of real debility and fancied disease.

All Laura's endeavours failed to animate him to cheerfulness, or rouse
him to employment. If he permitted her to remain by him, he seemed
rather to endure than to enjoy her presence, repressed with a languid
monosyllable her attempts at conversation, or passed whole hours in
listless silence. Laura, who forboded the worst consequences from the
indulgence of this depression, endeavoured to persuade him that he might
now safely attempt a voyage to Scotland, and predicted beneficial
effects from the sea air. But Montreville answered her with displeasure,
that such an exertion would certainly destroy him, and that those who
were themselves in high health and spirits, could not judge of the
feelings, nor sympathize with the weakness of disease. The reproach had
no more justice than is usual with the upbraidings of the sickly; for
Laura's spirits shared every turn of her father's, though her stronger
mind could support with grace the burden that weighed him to the earth.
She desisted, however, from a subject which she saw that, for the
present, he would not bear, and confined her endeavours to persuading
him to undertake some light occupation, or to walk in the little garden
that belonged to the house. But, even in these attempts she was commonly
defeated; for Montreville would make no exertion, and the winter wind,
now keen and biting, pierced through his wasted form.

None but they who have made the melancholy experiment, can tell how
cheerless is the labour of supporting the spirit that will make no
effort to sustain itself, of soliciting the languid smile, offering the
rejected amusement, or striving, with vain ingenuity, to enliven the
oft-repulsed conversation. They only know who have tried it, what it is
to resist contagious depression--to struggle against the effects of the
complaining voice, the languid motion, the hopeless aspect; what it is
to suppress the sympathetic sigh, and restrain the little sally of
impatience, so natural to those whose labours are incessant, yet
unavailing. Such were the tasks that Laura voluntarily prescribed to
herself. Incited by affection, and by strong sense of duty, she soothed
the fretful humour, prompted the reluctant exertion, fanned the expiring
hope, and seized the most favourable moment to soften by feminine
tenderness, or exhilarate by youthful gaiety.

Many motives may lead to one great effort of virtue. The hope of reward,
the desire of approbation, a sense of right, the natural benevolence
which still affords a faint trait of the image in which man was made,
all, or any of these, may produce single, or even oft-repeated acts
deserving of praise; but one principle alone can lead to virtuous
exertions persevering and unremitting though without success. That
principle was Laura's; and even while her endeavours seemed unavailing,
she was content to employ all her powers in the task selected for her by
the bestower of them.

Montreville often reproached himself for the untimely burden which he
was laying on the young heart of his daughter; but he could make no
effort to lighten it, and self-reproach served only to embitter the
spirit which it failed of stimulating to exertion. Fretful and
impatient, yet conscious of his injustice, and unwilling that Laura
should observe it, he would often dismiss her from her attendance, and
spend whole hours in solitary gloom. These hours Laura devoted to her
picture, stealing between whiles, on tiptoe, to the door of her father's
apartment, to listen whether he was stirring; and sometimes venturing to
knock gently for admittance.

The picture, which was far advanced when De Courcy left town, soon
received the finishing touches; and Laura lost no time in transmitting
it to Norwood. She wrote an affectionate letter to Harriet; in which,
after thanking her for all her kindness, she offered her gift, and
added, that to give her work a value which it would not otherwise have
possessed, she had introduced the portrait of De Courcy; and that, glad
of an opportunity of associating the remembrance of herself with an
object of interest, she had admitted her own resemblance into the group.
She apologized for the appearance of conceit which might attend her
exhibiting her own form under the character of Virtue, by relating, with
characteristic simplicity, that she had determined on her subject,
chosen and half-finished her Hercules, before she designed the figures
of his companions; that she had afterwards thought that her memorial
would be more effectual if it contained the portrait of the giver. 'And
you know,' added she, 'it would have been impossible to mould my solemn
countenance into the lineaments of Pleasure.'

In the singleness of her heart, it never occurred to Laura, that any
thing in the mutual relation of the figures of her piece stood in need
of explanation. Had Hargrave furnished the model for her hero, she would
probably have been a little more quick-sighted. As it was, she felt
impatient to shew the De Courcy family, not excepting Montague himself,
that she was not forgetful of their kindness; and she chose a day, when
the influence of bright sunshine a little revived the spirits of
Montreville, to leave him for an hour, and accompany the picture to the
shop of the obliging print-seller, that it might be packed more
skilfully than by herself.

After seeing it safely put up, she gave the address to Wilkins, who
immediately exclaimed, 'So, Ma'am, you have found out the secret that
you would not let me tell you?' 'What secret?' inquired Laura. 'The name
of the gentleman, Ma'am, that bought your pictures.' 'Was it De Courcy,
then?' 'Yes, Ma'am;--though to be sure it might'n't be the same. But I
suppose you'll know him, Ma'am. A tall pleasant-looking gentleman,
Ma'am. The pictures were sent home to Audley Street.' Laura's
countenance brightened with satisfaction, and she suffered her informer
to proceed. 'I am sure,' continued he, 'I managed that business to the
very best of my power, and, as one might say, very dexterously.' 'Was
there any occasion for management?' inquired Laura. 'Oh yes, Ma'am; for
when he seemed very much taken with the first one, then I told him all
about you just as I had it all from Mrs Dawkins, and how you were so
anxious to have it sold; and then he said he'd have it, and paid the
money into my hands; and then I told him how you looked the first day
you brought it here, and that you were just ready to cry about it; and
he said he must have a companion to it.'

The flush, both of pride and vexation, for once stained the transparent
skin of Laura. Yet it was but for a moment; and her next feeling was
pleasure at the confirmation of the benevolent character with which her
imagination had invested De Courcy. He had purchased her work when she
was quite unknown to him, only, as she thought, from a wish to reward
industry; and because he had been led to believe that the price was an
object to the artist. Had another been the purchaser, she might have
allowed something for the merit of the piece, but Laura was not yet
cured of first imagining characters, and then bending facts to suit her
theory. Sooner than bate one iota from De Courcy's benevolence, she
would have assigned to her picture the rank of a sign-post.

She now remembered, that in her visits to Audley Street she had never
seen her works; and in her approbation of the delicacy which prompted De
Courcy to conceal that she was known to him as an artist, she forgot the
little prejudice which this concealment implied. De Courcy, indeed, was
himself unconscious that he entertained any such prejudice. He applauded
Laura's exertions; he approved of the spirit that led a young woman of
family to dare, in spite of custom, to be useful. Yet he could not help
acting as if she had shared the opinion of the world, and been herself
ashamed of her labours. But this was a shame that Laura knew not. She
wished not indeed to intrude on the world's notice. Her choice was
peaceful obscurity. But if she must be known, she would have far
preferred the distinction earned by ingenious industry, to the notoriety
which wealth and luxury can purchase.

On her return home, she found her father reading a letter which he had
just received from De Courcy. It seemed written in an hour of
melancholy. The writer made no mention of returning to town; on the
contrary, he expressed a hope that Montreville might now be able to
undertake a journey to Scotland. He besought the Captain to remember
him, to speak of him often, and to write to him sometimes; and ended
with these words--'Farewell, my friend; the dearest of my earthly hopes
is, that we may one day meet again, though years, long years, must first
intervene.'

'So ends my last hope,' said Montreville, letting his head sink
mournfully on his breast; 'De Courcy comes not, and thou must be left
alone and unprotected.' 'The protection of so young a man,' said Laura,
avoiding to answer to a foreboding which she considered merely as a
symptom of her father's disease, 'might not perhaps have appeared
advantageous to me in the eyes of those who are unacquainted with Mr De
Courcy.' 'It would have given comfort to my dying hour,' said
Montreville, 'to consign thee to such a guardian--such a husband.' 'A
husband!' cried Laura, starting, and turning pale. 'Heaven be praised,
that Mr De Courcy never harboured such a thought!' Montreville looked up
in extreme surprise; and inquired the reason of her thankfulness. 'Oh
Sir,' she replied, 'we owe so much to Mr De Courcy's friendship, that I
should have hated myself for being unable to return his affection;--and
pity would it have been that the love of so amiable a being should have
been bestowed in vain.'

Montreville fixed his eyes upon her, as if to seek for further
explanation, and continued to gaze on her face, when his thoughts had
wandered from the examination of it. After some minutes of silence, he
said--'Laura, you once rejected an alliance, splendid beyond my hopes,
almost beyond my wishes, and that with a man formed to be the darling of
your sex; and now you speak as if even Montague De Courcy would have
failed to gain you. Tell me, then, have you any secret attachment? Speak
candidly, Laura;--you will not always have a father to confide in.'

Deep crimson dyed the cheeks of Laura; but, with the hesitation of a
moment, she replied--'No, Sir, I have no wish to marry. I pretend not to
lay open my whole heart to you; but I may with truth assure you, that
there is not at this moment a man in being with whom I would unite
myself. I know you would not be gratified by extorted confidence.'

'No, Laura,' said Montreville, 'I ask no more than you willingly avow. I
confide, as I have always done, in your prudence and integrity. Soon,
alas! you will have no other guides. But it was my heart's wish to see
you united to a man who could value and protect your worth--of late,
more especially, when I feel that I so soon must leave you.'

'My dearest father,' said Laura, throwing her arm affectionately round
his neck, 'do not give way to such gloomy forebodings. Your spirits are
oppressed by confinement--let us but see Glenalbert again, and all will
be well.'

'I shall never see Glenalbert,' said Montreville;--'and left alone in
such a place as this, without money, without friends, without a
home;--where shall my child find safety or shelter?'

'Indeed, Sir,' said Laura, though a cold shuddering seized her, 'your
fears have no foundation. Only yesterday Dr Flint told me that your
complaints were without danger, and that a little exercise would make
you quite strong again.'

Montreville shook his head. 'Dr Flint deceives you, Laura,' said
he;--'you deceive yourself.' 'No, indeed,' said Laura, though she
trembled; 'you look much better,--you are much better. It is only these
melancholy thoughts that retard your recovery. Trust yourself--trust me
to the Providence that has hitherto watched over us.'

'I could die without alarm,' said Montreville; 'but to leave thee alone
and in want--Oh! I cannot bear it.' 'Should the worst befal,' said
Laura, turning pale as alabaster, 'think that I shall not be alone, I
shall not want, for'--her voice failed, but she raised her eyes with an
expression that filled up the ennobling sentiment. 'I believe it, my
love,' said Montreville, 'but you feel these consolations more strongly
than I do. Leave me for the present, I am fatigued, and wish to be
alone.'

Laura retired to her own room, and endeavoured herself to practise the
trust which she recommended to her father. Her meditations were
interrupted by the entrance of her landlady, Mrs Stubbs, who, with many
courtesies and apologies, said that she was come to present her account.

Laura, who always had pleasure in cancelling a debt the moment it was
incurred, and who conceived no apology to be necessary from those who
came to demand only their own, received her landlady very graciously,
and begged her to be seated, while she went to bring her father's purse.
Mrs Stubbs spread her bills upon the table; and Laura, after examining
them, was obliged to ask an explanation.

'Why, ma'am,' returned the landlady, 'there are fourteen guineas for
lodgings for six weeks, and £10, 15s. for victuals and other articles
that I have furnished. I am sure I have kept an exact account.'

'I understood,' said Laura, 'that we were to have the lodgings for a
guinea and a half a-week, and'--'A guinea and a half!' cried the
landlady, colouring with wrath at this disparagement of her property.
'Sure, Miss, you did not think to have lodgings such as these for a
guinea and a half a-week. No, no--these lodgings have never been let for
less than four guineas, and never shall, as long as my name is
Bridget.'

Laura mildly pleaded her ignorance of those matters, and urged De
Courcy's information as an excuse for her mistake. 'To be sure, Ma'am,'
said the now pacified Mrs Stubbs, 'nobody that know'd any thing of the
matter, would expect to have such rooms for less than four guineas; and
that was what the gentleman said when he took them; so he paid me two
guineas and a half advance for four weeks; and charged me not to let you
know of it; but I can't abide them secret doings; and, besides, if I
take only a guinea and a half from you, where was I to look for the rest
of my rent for the last fortnight--for the young gentleman seems to have
taken himself off.'

Laura suffered her loquacious hostess to proceed without interruption,
for her thoughts were fully occupied. She had incurred a debt greater,
by five guineas, than she had been prepared to expect; and this sum was,
in her present circumstances, of great importance. Yet her predominant
feeling was grateful approbation of De Courcy's benevolence; nor did her
heart at all upbraid him with the consequences of his well-meant
deception. 'Kind, considerate De Courcy,' thought she; 'he had hoped
that, ere now, we should have ceased to need his generosity, and even
have been removed from the possibility of discovering it.'

Recollecting herself, she paid the landlady her full demand; and,
dismissing her, sat down to examine what remained of her finances. All
that she possessed, she found amounted to no more than one guinea and a
few shillings; and, dropping the money into her lap, she sat gazing on
it in blank dismay.

The poverty, whose approach she had so long contemplated with a fearful
eye, had now suddenly overtaken her. Husbanded with whatever care, the
sum before her could minister only to the wants of a few hours. In her
present habitation, it would scarcely purchase shelter for another night
from the storm which a keen winter-wind was beginning to drive against
her window. An immediate supply then was necessary; but where could that
supply be found? It was too late to resort to the earnings of her own
genius. Painting was a work of time and labour. No hasty production was
likely to find favour amidst the competition of studied excellence. Even
the highest effort of her art might long wait a purchaser; and tears
fell from the eyes of Laura while she reflected that, even if she could
again produce a Leonidas, she might never again find a De Courcy.

To borrow money on the Captain's half-pay, was an expedient which Laura
had always rejected, as calculated to load their scanty income with a
burden which it could neither shake off nor bear. But even to this
expedient she could now no longer have recourse; for Montreville had
assured her that, in his present state of health, it would be impossible
to mortgage his annuity for a single guinea.

She might raise a small supply by stripping her beloved Glenalbert of
some of its little luxuries and comforts; but, long before this
revolting business could be transacted, she must be absolutely
pennyless. Nor did she dare, without consulting her father, to give
orders for dismantling his home. And how should she inform him of the
necessity for such a sacrifice? Weakened both in body and in mind, how
would he endure the privations that attend on real penury? His naturally
feeble spirits already crushed to the earth, his kindly temper already,
by anxiety and disappointment, turned to gall, his anxieties for his
child alarmed even to anguish, how could he bear to learn that real want
had reached him--had reached that dear child, whom the dread of leaving
to poverty was poisoning the springs of life within him! 'He thinks he
is about to leave me,' cried she, 'and shall I tell him that I must owe
to charity even the sod that covers him from me? No; I will perish
first,' and, starting from her seat, she paced the room in distressful
meditation on the means of concealing from her father the extent of
their calamity.

She determined to take upon herself the care of their little fund, under
pretence that the trouble was too great for Montreville. He had of late
shewn such listless indifference to all domestic concerns, that she
hoped he might never inquire into the extent of his landlady's demand,
or that his inquiries might be eluded. It seemed a light thing in
Laura's eyes to suffer alone; or rather she thought not of her own
sufferings, could she but spare her father the anguish of knowing
himself and his child utterly destitute. She judged of his feelings by
her own; felt, by sympathy, all the pangs with which he would witness
wants which he could not supply; and she inwardly vowed to conceal from
him every privation that she might endure,--every labour that she might
undergo.

But, void of every resource, far from every friend, destitute amid
boundless wealth, alone amid countless multitudes, whither should she
turn for aid, or even for counsel? 'Whither,' cried she, dropping on her
knees, 'except to Him who hath supplied me in yet more urgent want, who
hath counselled me in yet more fearful difficulty, who hath fed my soul
with angel's food, and guided it with light from heaven?' Laura rose
from her devotions, more confiding in the care of Providence, more able
to consider calmly of improving the means which still remained within
her own power.

Before she could finish and dispose of a picture, weeks must elapse for
which she could make no provision. To painting, therefore, she could not
have immediate recourse. But sketches in chalk could be finished with
expedition; the printseller might undertake the sale of them; and the
lowness of the price might invite purchasers. Could she but hope to
obtain a subsistence for her father, she would labour night and day,
deprive herself of recreation, of rest, even of daily food, rather than
wound his heart, by an acquaintance with poverty. 'And since his pride
is hurt by the labours of his child,' said she, 'even his pride shall be
sacred. He shall never know my labours.' And, so frail are even the
best, that an emotion of pride swelled the bosom of Laura at the thought
that the merit of her toils was enhanced by their secrecy.

The resolutions of Laura were ever the immediate prelude to action; and
here was no time for delay. She again looked mournfully upon her little
treasure, hopelessly re-examined the purse that contained it; again,
with dismay, remembered that it was her all; then, hastily putting it
into her pocket, she drew her portfolio towards her, and began to
prepare for the work with the hurry of one to whom every moment seems
precious. Invention was at present impossible; but she tried to
recollect one of her former designs, and busied herself in sketching it
till the hour of dinner arrived. She then went to summon her father from
his chamber to the eating-room. 'This day,' thought she, 'I must share
his precarious sustenance--another I shall be more provident. And is
this then, perhaps, our last social meal?' and she turned for a moment
from the door, to suppress the emotion that would have choked her
utterance. 'Come in, my dear,' cried Montreville, who had heard her
footstep; and Laura entered with a smile. She offered her arm to assist
him in descending to the parlour. 'Why will you always urge me to go
down stairs, Laura,' said he; 'you see I am unequal to the fatigue.' 'I
shall not urge you to-morrow,' answered Laura: and Montreville thought
the tears which stood in her eyes, were the consequence of the impatient
tone in which he had spoken.

During the evening, Laura avoided all mention of restoring the purse to
her father, and he appeared to have forgotten its existence. But, by no
effort could she beguile those cheerless hours. Her utmost exertions
were necessary to maintain the appearance of composure; and De Courcy's
letter seemed to have consummated Montreville's feelings of solitude and
desolation. Wilfully, and without effort, he suffered his spirits to
expire. His whole train of thinking had become habitually gloomy. He was
wretched, even without reference to his situation, and the original
cause of his melancholy was rather the excuse than the reason of his
depression. But this only rendered more hopeless all attempts to cheer
him; for the woes of the imagination have this dire pre-eminence over
those which spring from real evils, that, while these can warm at times
in benevolent joy, or even brighten for a moment to the flash of
innocent gaiety, the selfishness of the former, chequered by no kindly
feeling, reflects not the sunny smile; as the dark and noisome fog
drinks in vain the beam of Heaven.

Montreville, when in health, had been always and justly considered a
kind-hearted, good-natured man. He had been a most indulgent husband, an
easy master, and a fond father. He was honourable, generous, and
friendly. Those who had witnessed his patient endurance of Lady
Harriet's caprice had given his philosophy a credit which was better due
to his indolence: for the grand defect of Montreville's character was a
total want of fortitude and self-command; and of these failings he was
now paying the penalty. His health was injured by his voluntary
inaction, his fancy aggravated his real disorder, and multiplied to
infinity his imaginary ailments. He had habituated his mind to images of
disaster, till it had become incapable of receiving any but comfortless
and doleful impressions.

After spending a few silent hours without effort towards employment or
recreation, he retired for the night; and Laura experienced a sensation
of relief, as, shutting herself away into her apartment, she prepared to
resume her labours. After every other member of the family had retired
to rest, she continued to work till her candle expired in the socket;
and then threw herself on her bed to rise again with the first blush of
dawn.

Montreville had been accustomed to breakfast in his own room; Laura
therefore found no difficulty in beginning her system of abstemiousness.
Hastily swallowing a few mouthfuls of dry bread, she continued her
drawing, till her father rang for his chocolate. She was fully resolved
to adhere to this plan, to labour with unceasing industry, and to deny
herself whatever was not essential to her existence.

But neither hard fare, nor labour, nor confinement, could occasion to
Laura such pain as she suffered from another of the necessities of her
situation. Amidst her mournful reflections, it had occurred to her, that
unless she would incur a debt which she could not hope to discharge, it
would be necessary to dismiss the surgeon who attended her father. All
her ideas of honour and integrity revolted from suffering a man to
expend his time and trouble, in expectation of a return which she was
unable to make. She was besides convinced that in Montreville's case
medicine could be of no avail. But she feared to hint the subject to her
father, lest she should lead to a discovery of their present
circumstances; and such was her conviction of the feebleness of his
spirits, and such her dread of the consequences of their increased
depression, that all earthly evils seemed light compared with that of
adding to his distress. Laura perhaps judged wrong; for one real evil
sometimes ameliorates the condition, by putting to flight a host of
imaginary calamities, and by compelling that exertion which makes any
situation tolerable. But she trembled for the effects of the slightest
additional suffering upon the life or the reason of her father; and she
would have thought it little less than parricide to add a new bruise to
the wounded spirit. On the other hand, she dreaded that Montreville, if
kept in ignorance of its real cause, might consider the desertion of his
medical attendant as an intimation that his case was hopeless, and
perhaps become the victim of his imaginary danger.

She knew not on what to resolve. Her distress and perplexity were
extreme; and if any thing could have vanquished the stubborn integrity
of Laura, the present temptation would have prevailed. But no wilful
fraud could be the issue of her deliberations, who was steadily
convinced that inflexible justice looks on to blast with a curse even
the successful schemes of villany, and to shed a blessing on the sorrows
of the upright. She would not even for her father incur a debt which she
could never hope to pay; and nothing remained but to consider of the
best means of executing her painful determination.

Here a new difficulty occurred, for she could not decline the surgeon's
further attendance without offering to discharge what she already owed.
In the present state of her funds, this was utterly impossible; for
though, at her instigation, his bill had been lately paid, she was sure
that the new one must already amount to more than all she possessed. How
to procure the necessary supply she knew not; for even if she could have
secured the immediate sale of her drawings, the price of her daily and
nightly toil would scarcely suffice to pay for the expensive habitation
which she durst not propose to leave, and to bribe the fastidious
appetite of Montreville with dainties of which he could neither bear the
want nor feel the enjoyment.

Once only, and it was but for a moment, she thought of appealing to the
humanity of Dr Flint, of unfolding to him her situation, and begging
his attendance upon the chance of future remuneration. But Laura was
destined once more to pay the penalty of her hasty judgments of
character. On Montreville's first illness, Dr Flint had informed Laura,
with (as she thought) great want of feeling, of her father's danger. He
was a gaunt, atrabilious, stern-looking man, with a rough voice, and
cold repulsive manners. He had, moreover, an uninviting name; and though
Laura was ashamed to confess to herself that such trifles could
influence her judgment, these disadvantages were the real cause why she
always met Dr Flint with a sensation resembling that with which one
encounters a cold, damp, north-east wind. To make any claim upon the
benevolence of a stranger--and such a stranger! It was not to be thought
of. Yet Laura's opinion, or rather her feelings, wronged Dr Flint. His
exterior, it is true, was far from prepossessing. It is also true, that,
considering Montreville's first illness as the effect of a very
unpardonable levity on the part of Laura, he had spoken to her on that
occasion with even more than his usual frigidity. Nor did he either
possess or lay claim to any great share of sensibility; but he was not
destitute of humanity; and had Laura explained to him her situation, he
would willingly have attended her father without prospect of recompense.
But Laura did not put his benevolence to the test. She suffered him to
make his morning visit and depart; while she was considering of a plan
which appeared little less revolting.

Laura knew that one of the most elegant houses in Grosvenor Street was
inhabited by a Lady Pelham, the daughter of Lady Harriet Montreville's
mother by a former marriage. She knew that, for many years, little
intercourse had subsisted between the sisters; and that her father was
even wholly unknown to Lady Pelham. But she was ignorant, that the
imprudence of her mother's marriage served as the excuse for a coldness,
which had really existed before it had any such pretext.

With all her Scotish prejudice in favour of the claims of kindred (and
Laura in this and many other respects was entirely a Scotch woman), she
could not, without the utmost repugnance, think of applying to her
relation. To introduce herself to a stranger whom she had never seen--to
appear not only as an inferior, but as a supplicant--a beggar! Laura had
long and successfully combated the innate pride of human nature; but her
humility almost failed under this trial. Her illustrious ancestry--the
dignity of a gentlewoman--the independence of one who can bear to labour
and endure to want, all rose successively to her mind; for pride can
wear many specious forms. But she had nearer claims than the honour of
her ancestry--dearer concerns than her personal importance; and when she
thought of her father, she felt that she was no longer independent.

Severe was her struggle, and bitter were the tears which she shed over
the conviction that it was right that she should become a petitioner for
the bounty of a stranger. In vain did she repeat to herself, that she
was a debtor to the care of Providence for her daily bread, and was not
entitled to choose the means by which it was supplied. She could not
conquer her reluctance. But she could act right in defiance of it. She
could sacrifice her own feelings to the comfort of her father--to a
sense of duty. Nay, upon reflection, she could rejoice that
circumstances compelled her to quell that proud spirit with which, as a
Christian, she maintained a constant and vigorous combat.

While these thoughts were passing in her mind, she had finished her
drawing; and, impatient to know how far this sort of labour was likely
to be profitable, she furnished her father with a book to amuse him in
her absence; and, for the first time since they had occupied their
present lodgings, expressed a wish to take a walk for amusement. Had
Montreville observed the blushes that accompanied this little
subterfuge, he would certainly have suspected that the amusement which
this walk promised was of no common kind; but he was in one of his
reveries, hanging over the mantle-piece, with his forehead resting on
his arm, and did not even look up while he desired her not to be long
absent.

She resolved to go first to Lady Pelham, that coming early she might
find her disengaged, and afterwards to proceed to the print-shop.

The wind blew keen across the snow as Laura began her reluctant
pilgrimage. Her summer attire, to which her finances could afford no
addition, ill defended her from the blast. Through the streets of London
she was to explore her way unattended. Accustomed to find both beauty
and pleasure in the solitude of her walks, she was to mix in the throngs
of a rude rabble, without protection from insult. But no outward
circumstances could add to the feelings of comfortless dismay with which
she looked forward to the moment, when, ushered through stately
apartments into the presence of self-important greatness, she should
announce herself a beggar. Her courage failed--she paused, and made one
step back towards her home. But she recalled her former thoughts. 'I
have need to be humbled,' said she; and again proceeded on her way.

As she left the little garden that surrounded her lodgings, she
perceived an old man who had taken shelter by one of the pillars of the
gate. He shivered in the cold, which found easy entrance through the
rags that covered him, and famine glared from his hollow eye. His gray
hair streamed on the wind, as he held out the tattered remains of a hat,
and said, 'Please to help me, Lady.--I am very poor.' He spoke in the
dialect of her native land, and the accents went to Laura's heart;--for
Laura was in the land of strangers. She had never been deaf to the
petitions of the poor; for all the poor of Glenalbert were known to her;
and she knew that what she spared from her own comforts, was not made
the minister of vice. Her purse was already in her hand, ere she
remembered that to give was become a crime.

As the thought crossed her, she started like one who had escaped from
sudden danger. 'No, I must not give you money,' said she, and returned
the purse into her pocket, with a pang that taught her the true
bitterness of poverty. 'I am cold and hungry,' said the man still
pleading, and taking encouragement from Laura's relenting eye. 'Hungry!'
repeated Laura, 'then come with me, and I will give you bread;' and she
returned to the house to bestow on the old man the humble fare which she
had before destined to supply her own wants for the day, glad to
purchase by a longer fast the right to feed the hungry.

'In what respect am I better than this poor creature,' said she to
herself, as she returned with the beggar to the gate, 'that I should
offer to him with ease, and even with pleasure, what I myself cannot ask
without pain. Surely I do not rightly believe that we are of the same
dust! The same frail, sinful, perishable, dust!'

But it was in vain that Laura continued to argue with herself. In this
instance she could only do her duty; she could not love it. Her heart
filled, and the tears rose to her eyes. She dashed them away--but they
rose again.

When she found herself in Grosvenor Street, she paused for a moment.
'What if Lady Pelham should deny my request? dismiss me as a bold
intruder? Why, then,' said Laura, raising her head, and again advancing
with a firmer step, 'I shall owe no obligation to a stranger.'

She approached the house--she ascended the steps. Almost breathless she
laid her hand upon the knocker. At that moment she imagined her entrance
through files of insolent domestics into a room filled with gay company.
She anticipated the inquisitive glances--shrunk in fancy from the
supercilious examination; and she again drew back her hand. 'I shall
never have courage to face all this,' thought she. While we hesitate, a
trifle turns the scale. Laura perceived that she had drawn the attention
of a young man on the pavement, who stood gazing on her with familiar
curiosity; and she knocked, almost before she was sensible that she
intended it.

The time appeared immeasurable till the door was opened by a
maid-servant. 'Is Lady Pelham at home?' inquired Laura, taking
encouragement from the sight of one of her own sex. 'No, Ma'am,'
answered the maid, 'my lady is gone to keep Christmas in ----shire, and
will not return for a fortnight.' Laura drew a long breath, as if a
weight had been lifted from her breast; and, suppressing an ejaculation
of 'thank Heaven,' sprung in the lightness of her heart at one skip from
the door to the pavement.




CHAPTER XVI


Laura's exultation was of short continuance. She had gone but a few
steps ere she reflected that the wants which she had undertaken so
painful a visit to supply were as clamant as ever, and now further than
ever from a chance of relief. Mournfully she pursued her way towards the
print-shop, hopelessly comparing her urgent and probably prolonged
necessities with her confined resources.

The utmost price which she could hope to receive for the drawing she
carried, would be far from sufficient to discharge her debt to the
surgeon; and there seemed now no alternative but to confess her
inability to pay, and to throw herself upon his mercy. To this measure,
however, she was too averse to adopt it without reconsidering every
other possible expedient. She thought of appealing to the friendship of
Mrs Douglas, and of suffering Dr Flint to continue his visits till an
answer from her friend should enable her to close the connection. But
Mrs Douglas's scanty income was taxed to the uttermost by the
maintenance and education of a numerous family, by the liberal charities
of its owners, and by the hospitable spirit, which, banished by
ostentation from more splendid abodes, still lingers by the fireside of
a Scotch clergyman. Laura was sure that Mrs Douglas would supply her
wants at whatever inconvenience to herself; and this very consideration
withheld her from making application to her friend.

Laura had heard and read that ladies in distress had found subsistence
by the sale of their ornaments. But by their example she could not
profit; for her ornaments were few in number and of no value. She wore
indeed a locket, which she had once received from her mother, with a
strong injunction neither to lose nor give it away; but Laura, in her
profound ignorance of the value of trinkets, attached no estimation to
this one, except as the only unnecessary gift which she had ever
received from her mother. 'It contains almost as much gold as a guinea,'
said she, putting her hand to it, 'and a guinea will soon be a great
treasure to me.' Still she determined that nothing short of extremity
should induce her to part with it; but desirous to ascertain the extent
of this last resort, she entered the shop of a jeweller, and presenting
the locket, begged to know its value.

After examining it, the jeweller replied that he believed it might be
worth about five guineas, 'for though,' said he, 'the setting is
antiquated, these emeralds are worth something.'

At the mention of this sum, all Laura's difficulties seemed to vanish.
Besides enabling her to pay the surgeon, it would make an addition to
her little fund. With rigorous abstinence on her part, this little fund,
together with the price of her incessant labour, would pay for her
lodgings, and support her father in happy ignorance of his poverty, till
he was able to remove to Glenalbert. Then, when he was quite well and
quite able to bear it, she would tell him how she had toiled for him,
and he would see that he had not lavished his fondness on a thankless
child.

These thoughts occupied far less time than the recital; and yet, ere
they were passed, Laura had untied the locket from her neck, and put it
into the hands of the jeweller. It was not till she saw it in the hands
of another, that she felt all the pain of parting with it. She asked to
see it once more; as she gazed on it for the last time, tears trickled
from her eyes; but speedily wiping them away, and averting her head, she
restored the locket to its new owner, and taking up the money, departed.

She soon arrived at the print-shop, and finding Wilkins disengaged,
produced her drawing, and asked him to purchase it. Wilkins looked at
it, and inquired what price she had put upon it. 'I am quite
unacquainted with its real value,' answered she, 'but the rapid sale of
my work is at present such an object to me, that I shall willingly make
it as cheap as possible, or allow you to fix your own price.' 'Have you
any more to dispose of, Ma'am?' asked Wilkins. 'I have none finished,
but I could promise you six more in a week if you are inclined to take
them.' 'I think,' said Wilkins, 'after some consideration, I might
venture to take them if you could afford them for half a guinea each.'
'You shall have them,' said Laura, with a sigh; 'but I think
half-a-guinea rather a low--a high, I believe, I mean.--'

Laura did not at this moment exactly know what she meant; for her eyes
had just rested on a gentleman, who, with his back towards her, was
busied in examining a book of caricatures. She thought she could not be
mistaken in the person. Only one form upon earth was endowed with such
symmetry and grace; and that form was Hargrave's. He slightly turned his
head, and Laura was certain.

Though Laura neither screamed nor fainted, this recognition was not made
without extreme emotion. She trembled violently, and a mist spread
before her eyes; but she remembered the apparently wilful desertion of
her lover; and, determined neither to claim his compassion nor gratify
his vanity by any of the airs of a forsaken damsel, she quietly turned
away from him, and leant against the counter to recover strength and
composure.

She was resolved to quit the shop the instant that she was able; and
yet, perhaps she would have become sooner sensible of her recovered
powers of motion, had it not been for a latent hope that the caricatures
would not long continue so very interesting. No one however, accosted
her; and next came the idea that Hargrave had already observed her,
without wishing to claim her acquaintance. Before the mortifying thought
could take a distinct form, Laura was already on her way towards the
door.

'You have left your half-guinea, Ma'am,' said Wilkins, calling after
her; and Laura, half angry at being detained, turned back to fetch it.
At this moment Hargrave's eye fell upon her half averted face. Surprise
and joy illuminating his fine countenance, 'Laura!' he exclaimed, 'is it
possible! have I at last found you?' and springing forward, he clasped
her to his breast, regardless of the inquisitive looks and significant
smiles of the spectators of his transports. But to the scrutiny of
strangers, to the caresses of Hargrave, even to the indecorum of her
situation, poor Laura was insensible. Weakened by the fatigue and
emotion of the two preceding days, overcome by the sudden conviction
that she had not been wilfully neglected, her head sunk upon the
shoulder of Hargrave, and she lost all consciousness.

When Laura recovered, she found herself in a little parlour adjoining to
the shop, with no attendant but Hargrave, who still supported her in his
arms. Her first thought was vexation at her own ill-timed sensibility;
her next, a resolution to make no further forfeiture of her
respectability, but rather, by the most stoical composure, to regain
what she had lost. For this purpose, she soon disengaged herself from
her perilous support, and unwilling to speak till secure of maintaining
her firmness, she averted her head, and returned all Hargrave's
raptures of love and joy with provoking silence.

As soon as she had completely recovered her self-possession, she rose,
and apologizing for the trouble she had occasioned him, said she would
return home. Hargrave eagerly begged permission to accompany her, saying
that his carriage was in waiting, and would convey them. Laura, with
cold politeness, declined his offer. Though a little piqued by her
manner, Hargrave triumphed in the idea that he retained all his former
influence. 'My bewitching Laura,' said he, taking her hand, 'I beseech
you to lay aside this ill-timed coquetry. After so sweet, so interesting
a proof, that you still allow me some power over your feelings, must I
accuse you of an affectation of coldness?' 'No, sir,' said Laura
indignantly, 'rather of a momentary weakness, for which I despise
myself.'

The lover could not indeed have chosen a more unfavourable moment to
express his exultation; for Laura's feelings of humiliation and
self-reproach were just then raised to their height, by her perceiving
the faces of two of the shop-boys peeping through the glass door with an
aspect of roguish curiosity. Conscious of her inability to walk home,
and feeling her situation quite intolerable, she called to one of the
little spies, and begged that he would instantly procure her a hackney
coach.

Hargrave vehemently remonstrated against this disorder. 'Why this unkind
haste?' said he. 'Surely after so tedious, so tormenting an absence, you
need not grudge me a few short moments.' Laura thought he was probably
himself to blame for the absence of which he complained, and coldly
answering, 'I have already been detained too long,' was about to quit
the room, when Hargrave, impatiently seizing her hand, exclaimed,
'Unfeeling Laura! does that relentless pride never slumber? Have I
followed you from Scotland, and sought you for three anxious months, to
be met without one kind word, one pitying look!'

'Followed me!' repeated Laura with surprise.

'Yes, upon my life, my journey hither had no other object. After you so
cruelly left me, without warning or farewell, how could I endure to
exist in the place which you once made delightful to me. Indeed I could
not bear it. I resolved to pursue you wherever you went, to breathe at
least the same air with you, sometimes to feast my fond eyes with that
form, beyond imagination lovely--perhaps to win that beguiling smile
which no heart can withstand. The barbarous caution of Mrs Douglas in
refusing me your address, has caused the disappointment of all my
hopes.'

Hargrave had egregiously mistaken the road to Laura's favour when he
threw a reflection upon her friend. 'Mrs Douglas certainly acted right,'
said she. 'I have equal confidence in her prudence and in her
friendship.' 'Probably then,' said Hargrave, reddening with vexation,
'this system of torture originated with you. It was at your desire that
your friend withstood all my entreaties.' 'No,' answered Laura, 'I
cannot claim the merit of so much forethought. I certainly did not
expect the honour that you are pleased to say you have done me,
especially when you were doubtful both of my abode and of your own
reception.'

'Insulting girl,' cried Hargrave, 'you know too well, that, however
received, still I must follow you. And, but for a series of the most
tormenting accidents, I should have defeated the caution of your
cold-hearted favourite. At the Perth post-office I discovered that your
letters were addressed to the care of Mr Baynard; and the very hour that
I reached London, I flew to make inquiries after you. I found that Mr
Baynard's house was shut up, and that he was gone in bad health to
Richmond. I followed him, and was told that he was too ill to be spoken
with, that none of the servants knew your abode, as the footman who used
to carry messages to you had been dismissed, and that your letters were
now left at Mr Baynard's chambers in town. Thither I went, and learnt
that, ever since your removal to Richmond, you had yourself sent for
your letters, and that, of course, the clerks were entirely ignorant of
your residence. Imagine my disappointment. The people, however, promised
to make inquiries of your messenger, and to let me know where you might
be found; and day after day did I haunt them, the sport of vain hope and
bitter disappointment. No other letter ever came for you, nor did you
ever inquire for any.'

'After Mr Baynard's removal to Richmond,' said Laura, 'I directed Mrs
Douglas to address her letters to our lodgings.'

'Ah Laura, think what anxieties, what wretchedness I have suffered in my
fruitless search! Yet you meet me only to drive me coldly from your
presence. Once you said that you pardoned the folly--the madness that
offended you; but too well I see that you deceived yourself or me--that
no attachment, no devotion can purchase your forgiveness.' 'Indeed,'
said Laura, melted by the proof which she had received of her lover's
affection, yet fearful of forfeiting her caution, 'I am incapable of
harbouring enmity against the worst of human beings, and--'

'Enmity!' interrupted Hargrave, 'Heavens, what a word!' 'I mean,' said
Laura, faltering, 'that I am not insensible to the regard--'

'Madam, the coach is at the door,' said the shop-boy, again peeping
slily into the room; and Laura, hastily bidding Hargrave good morning,
walked towards the carriage. Having herself given the coachman his
directions, she suffered Hargrave to hand her in, giving him a slight
bow in token of dismissal. He continued, however, to stand for some
moments with his foot upon the step, waiting for a look of permission to
accompany her; but, receiving none, he sprung into the seat by her side,
and called to the man to drive on. Laura offended at his boldness, gave
him a very ungracious look, and drew back in silence, 'I see you think
me presumptuous,' said he, 'but, just found, how can I consent to leave
you? Oh Laura, if you knew what I have suffered from an absence that
seemed endless! Not for worlds would I endure such another.'

'The stipulated two years are still far from a close,' said Laura
coldly; 'and, till they are ended, our intercourse cannot be too
slight.'

'Surely,' cried Hargrave, 'when you fixed this lingering probation, you
did not mean to banish me from your presence for two years!' Laura could
not with truth aver that such a banishment had been her intention. 'I
believe,' said she, suppressing a sigh, 'that would have been my wisest
meaning.' 'I would sooner die,' cried Hargrave, vehemently. 'Oh, had I
sooner found you,' added he, a dark expression which Laura could not
define clouding his countenance, 'what wretchedness would have been
spared! But now that we have at last met,' continued he, his eyes again
sparkling with love and hope, 'I will haunt you, cling to you,
supplicate you, till I melt you to a passion as fervent as my own,'
While he spoke he dropped upon his knee by her side, and drew his arm
passionately round her. Time had been, that Laura, trembling with
irrepressible emotion, would have withdrawn from the embrace,
reproaching herself for sensations from which she imagined that the more
spotless heart of her lover was free, and hating herself for being
unable to receive as a sister, the caresses of a fondness pure as a
brother's love. But Hargrave had himself torn the veil from her eyes;
and shrinking from him as if a serpent had crossed her path, she cast on
him a look that struck like an ice-bolt on the glowing heart of
Hargrave. 'Just Heaven!' he cried, starting up with a convulsive
shudder, 'this is abhorrence! Why, why have you deceived me with a
false show of sensibility? Speak it at once,' said he, wildly grasping
her arm; 'say that you detest me, and tell me too who has dared to
supplant me in a heart once wholly mine.'

'Be calm, I implore you,' said Laura, terrified at his violence, 'no one
has supplanted you. I am, I ever shall be, whatever you deserve to find
me.'

Laura's soothing voice, her insinuating look, retained all their wonted
power to calm the fierce passions of her lover. 'Oh I shall never
deserve you,' said he in a tone of wretchedness, while his face was
again crossed by an expression of anguish, which the unsuspecting Laura
attributed to remorse for his former treatment of herself.

The carriage at this moment stopped, and anxious to calm his spirits at
parting, Laura smiled kindly upon him, and said, 'Be ever thus humble in
your opinion of your own merits, ever thus partial in your estimate of
mine, and then,' added she, the tears trembling in her lovely eyes, 'we
shall meet again in happier circumstances.' 'You must not, shall not
leave me thus,' cried Hargrave impatiently, 'I will not quit this spot,
till you have consented to see me again.' 'Do not ask it,' replied
Laura. 'A long, long time must elapse, much virtuous exertion must be
undergone, ere I dare receive you with other than this coldness, which
appears to be so painful to you. Why then sport with your own feelings
and with mine?' 'Ah Laura,' said Hargrave in a voice of supplication,
'use me as you will, only suffer me to see you.' Moved with the
imploring tone of her lover, Laura turned towards him that she might
soften by her manner the meditated refusal; but, in an evil hour for her
resolution, she met the fine eyes of Hargrave suffused with tears, and,
wholly unable to utter what she intended, she remained silent. Hargrave
was instantly sensible of his advantage, and willing to assist her
acquiescence by putting his request into a less exceptionable form, he
said, 'I ask not even for your notice, suffer me but to visit your
father.' 'My father has been very ill,' returned Laura, who, unknown to
herself, rejoiced to find an excuse for her concession, 'and it may give
_him_ pleasure to see you; but I can claim no share in the honour of
your visits.' Hargrave, delighted with his success, rapturously thanked
her for her condescension; and springing from the carriage, led her, but
half satisfied with her own conduct, into the house.

She ushered him into the parlour, and before he had time to detain her,
glided away to acquaint her father with his visit. She found the Captain
wrapt in the same listless melancholy in which she had left him; the
book which she had meant to entertain him, used only as a rest for his
arm. Laura was now beset with her old difficulty. She had not yet learnt
to speak of Hargrave without sensible confusion; and to utter his name
while any eye was fixed upon her face, required an effort which no
common circumstances could have tempted her to make. She therefore took
refuge behind her father's chair, before she began her partial relation
of her morning's adventure.

'And is he now in the house,' cried Montreville, with an animation which
he had long laid aside. 'I rejoice to hear it. Return to him
immediately, my love. I will see him in a few minutes.' 'As soon as you
choose to receive him,' said Laura; 'I shall carry your commands. I
shall remain in the dressing-room.' 'For shame, Laura!' returned
Montreville. 'I thought you had been above these silly airs of conquest.
Colonel Hargrave's rejected passion gives you no right to refuse him the
politeness due to all your father's guests.' 'Certainly not, Sir,
but'--she stopped, hesitating--'however,' added she, 'since _you_ wish
it, I will go.'

It was not without embarrassment that Laura returned to her lover; to
offer him another tête à tête seemed so like soliciting a renewal of his
ardours. In this idea she was stopping at the parlour door, collecting
her courage, and meditating a speech decorously repulsive, when
Hargrave, who had been listening for her approach, impatiently stepped
out to look for her, and in a moment spoiled all her concerted oratory,
by taking her hand and leading her into the room.

Though Hargrave could at any time take Laura's feelings by surprise, an
instant was sufficient to restore her self-possession; and withdrawing
her hand, she said, 'In a few minutes, Sir, my father will be glad to
see you, and at his desire I attend you till he can have that honour.'
'Bless him for the delay!' cried Hargrave, 'I have a thousand things to
say to you.' 'And I, Sir,' said Laura, solemnly, 'have one thing to say
to you, of more importance to me, probably, than all the thousand.'

Hargrave bit his lip; and Laura proceeded, her colour, as painful
recollection rose, fading from the crimson that had newly flushed it, to
the paleness of anguish. 'Six months ago,' said she, speaking with an
effort that rendered her words scarcely articulate--'Six months ago you
made me a promise. Judge of my anxiety that you should keep it, when to
secure its fulfilment I can call up a subject so revolting--so
dreadful.' She paused--a cold shudder running through her limbs: but
Hargrave, abashed and disconcerted, gave her no interruption, and
ventured not even to raise his eyes from the ground. 'My father,' she
continued, 'is no longer able to avenge his child;--the bare mention of
her wrongs would destroy him. If then you value my peace--if you dread
my detestation--let no circumstance seduce, no accident surprise from
you this hateful secret.'

While she spoke, the blushes which had deserted her cheek were
transferred to that of Hargrave; for though, to his own conscience, he
had palliated his former outrage till it appeared a very venial
trespass, he was not proof against the unaffected horror with which it
had inspired the virtuous Laura. Throwing himself at her feet, and
hiding his face in her gown, he bitterly, and for the moment sincerely,
bewailed his offence, and vowed to devote his life to its expiation.
Then, starting up, he struck his hand wildly upon his forehead, and
exclaimed, 'Madman that I have been! Oh, Laura, thy heavenly purity
makes me the veriest wretch. No--thou canst never pardon me!'

The innocent Laura, who little suspected all his causes of
self-reproach, wept tears of joy over his repentance, and, in a voice
full of tenderness, said, 'Indeed I have myself too many faults to be
unrelenting. Contrition and amendment are all that Heaven requires--why
should I ask more?' Hargrave saw that she attributed all his agitation
to remorse for his conduct towards herself; but the effects of her
mistake were too delightful to suffer him to undeceive her; and
perceiving at once that he had found the master-spring of all her
tenderness, he overpowered her with such vows, protestations, and
entreaties, that, before their conference was interrupted, he had,
amidst tremors, blushes, and hesitation, which spoke a thousand times
more than her words, wrung from her a confession that she felt a more
than friendly interest in the issue of his probation.

Indeed Montreville was in no haste to break in upon their dialogue. That
any woman should have refused the hand of the handsome--the
insinuating--the gallant Colonel Hargrave, had always appeared to him
little less than miraculous. He had been told, that ladies sometimes
rejected what they did not mean to relinquish; and though he could
scarcely believe his daughter capable of such childish coquetry, he was
not without faith in a maxim, which, it must be confessed, receives
sanction from experience, namely, that in all cases of feminine
obduracy, perseverance is an infallible recipé. This recipé, he had no
doubt, was now to be tried upon Laura; and he fervently wished that it
might be with success. Though he was too affectionate a father to form
on this subject a wish at variance with his daughter's happiness, he had
never been insensible to the desire of seeing her brow graced by a
coronet. But now more important considerations made him truly anxious to
consign her to the guardianship of a man of honour.

The unfortunate transaction of the annuity would, in the event of his
death, leave her utterly destitute. That event, he imagined, was fast
approaching; and with many a bitter pang he remembered that he had
neither friend nor relative with whom he could entrust his orphan child.
His parents had long been dead; his only surviving brother, a
fox-hunting squire of small fortune, shared his table and bed with a
person who had stooped to these degrading honours from the more
reputable situation of an innocent dairy-maid. With Lady Harriet's
relations (for friends she had none), Montreville had never maintained
any intercourse. They had affected to resent his intrusion into the
family, and he had not been industrious to conciliate their favour.
Except himself, therefore, Laura had no natural protector; and this
circumstance made him tenfold more anxious that she should recal her
decision in regard to Hargrave.

He had no doubt that the present visit was intended for Laura; and he
suffered as long a time to elapse before he claimed any share in it, as
common politeness would allow. He had meant to receive the Colonel in
his own apartment, but an inclination to observe the conduct of the
lovers, induced him to make an effort to join them in the parlour, where
he with pleasure discovered by the countenances of both, that their
conversation had been mutually interesting. Hargrave instantly recovered
himself, and paid his compliments with his accustomed grace; but Laura,
by no means prepared to stand inspection, disappeared the moment her
father entered the room.

This was the first time that the gentlemen had met, since the day when
Montreville had granted his fruitless sanction to the Colonel's suit.
Delicacy prevented the father from touching upon the subject, and it was
equally avoided by Hargrave, who had not yet determined in what light to
represent his repulse. However, as it completely occupied the minds of
both, the conversation, which turned on topics merely indifferent, was
carried on with little spirit on either side, and was soon closed by
Hargrave's taking leave, after begging permission to repeat his visit.

Colonel Hargrave had promised to spend that evening with the most
beautiful woman in London; but the unexpected rencounter of the
morning, left him in no humour to fulfil his engagement. He had found
his Laura,--his lovely, his innocent Laura,--the object of his only
serious passion,--the only woman whose empire reached beyond his senses.
He had found her cautious, reserved, severe; yet feeling, constant, and
tender. He remembered the overwhelming joy which made her sink fainting
on his bosom; called to mind her ill-suppressed tears--her smothered
sighs--her unbidden blushes; and a thousand times assured himself that
he was passionately beloved. He triumphed the more in the proofs of her
affection, because they were not only involuntary but reluctant; and,
seen through the flattering medium of gratified pride, her charms
appeared more than ever enchanting. On these charms he had formerly
suffered his imagination to dwell, till to appropriate them seemed to
him almost the chief end of existence; and, though in absence his frenzy
had a little intermitted, his interview with Laura roused it again to
double violence.

No passion of Hargrave's soul (and all his passions were of intense
force), had ever known restraint, or control, or even delay of
gratification, excepting only this, the strongest that had ever governed
him. And must he now pine for eighteen lingering months, ere he attained
the object of such ardent wishes? Must he submit, for a time that seemed
endless, to the tyranny of this intolerable passion,--see the woman on
whom he doated receive his protestations with distrust, and spite of her
affection, shrink from his caresses with horror? No!--he vowed that if
there were persuasion in man, or frailty in woman, he would shorten the
period of his trial,--that he would employ for this purpose all the
power which he possessed over Laura's heart, and, if that failed, that
he would even have recourse to the authority of the father.

But he had yet a stronger motive than the impetuosity of his passions
for striving to obtain immediate possession of his treasure. He was
conscious that there was a tale to tell, which, once known, (and it
could not long be concealed), would shake his hopes to the foundation.
But on this subject he could not now dwell without disgust, and he
turned from it to the more inviting contemplation of Laura's beauty and
Laura's love; and with his head and his heart, every nerve, every pulse
full of Laura, he retired to pursue in his dreams, the fair visions that
had occupied his waking thoughts.

While he was thus wilfully surrendering himself to the dominion of his
frenzy, Laura, the self-denied Laura, was endeavouring, though it must
be owned without distinguished success, to silence the pleadings of a
heart as warm, though better regulated, by attending to the humble
duties of the hour.

When she quitted Hargrave, she had retired to offer up her fervent
thanks to Heaven, that he was become sensible of the enormity of his
former conduct. Earnestly did she pray, that, though earth should never
witness their union, they might be permitted together to join a nobler
society--animated by yet purer love--bound by yet holier ties. She next
reconsidered her own behaviour towards Hargrave; and, though vexed at
the momentary desertion of her self-command, saw, upon the whole, little
cause to reproach herself, since her weakness had been merely that of
body, to which the will gave no consent. She resolved to be guardedly
cautious in her future demeanour towards him; and since the issue of his
probation was doubtful, since its close was at all events distant, to
forfeit the enjoyment of her lover's company, rather than, by remaining
in the room during his visits, appear to consider them as meant for
herself.

As soon as Hargrave was gone, Montreville returned to his chamber; and
there Laura ordered his small but delicate repast to be served, excusing
herself from partaking of it, by saying that she could dine more
conveniently in the parlour. Having in the morning bestowed on the
beggar the meagre fare that should have supplied her own wants, she
employed the time of her father's meal, in the labour which was to
purchase him another; pondering meanwhile on the probability that he
would again enter on the discussion of Hargrave's pretensions. To this
subject she felt unconquerable repugnance; and though she knew that it
must at last be canvassed, and that she must at last assign a reason for
her conduct, she would fain have put off the evil hour.

She delayed her evening visit to her father, till he grew impatient for
it, and sent for her to his apartment. The moment she entered the room,
he began, as she had anticipated, to inquire into the particulars of her
interview with Hargrave. The language of Laura's reply was not very
perspicuous; the manner of it was more intelligible: and Montreville,
instantly comprehended the nature of her conference with the Colonel.
'He has then given you an opportunity of repairing your former
rashness,' said Montreville, with eagerness,--'and your answer?'
'Colonel Hargrave had his answer long ago, Sir', replied Laura,
trembling at this exordium. Montreville sighed heavily, and, fixing his
eyes mournfully upon her, remained silent. At last, affectionately
taking her hand, he said, 'My dear child, the time has been, when even
your caprices on this subject were sacred with your father. While I had
a shelter, however humble--an independence, however small, to offer you,
your bare inclination determined mine. But now your situation is
changed--fatally changed; and no trivial reasons would excuse me for
permitting your rejection of an alliance so unexceptionable, so
splendid. Tell me, then, explicitly, what are your objections to Colonel
Hargrave?'

Laura remained silent, for she knew not how to frame her reply. 'Is it
possible that he can be personally disagreeable to you?' continued
Montreville. 'Disagreeable!' exclaimed Laura, thrown off her guard by
astonishment. 'Colonel Hargrave is one whom any woman might--whom no
woman could know without--' 'Without what?' said Montreville, with a
delighted smile. But Laura, shocked at the extent of her own admission,
covered her face with her hands, and almost in tears, made no reply.

'Well, my love,' said Montreville, more cheerfully than he had spoken
for many a day. 'I can interpret all this, and will not persecute you.
But you must still suffer me to ask what strange reasons could induce
you to reject wealth and title, offered by a man not absolutely
_disagreeable_?' Laura strove to recollect herself, and deep crimson
dying her beautiful face and neck, she said without venturing to lift
her eyes, 'You yourself have told me, Sir, that Colonel Hargrave is a
man of gallantry, and, believe me, with such a man I should be most
miserable.'

'Come, come, Laura,' said Montreville, putting his arm around her,
'confess, that some little fit of jealousy made you answer Hargrave
unkindly at first, and that now a little female pride, or the obstinacy
of which we used to accuse you fifteen years ago, makes you unwilling to
retract.'

'No, indeed,' returned Laura, with emotion, 'Colonel Hargrave has never
given me cause to be jealous of his affection. But jealousy would feebly
express the anguish with which his wife would behold his vices,
degrading him in the eyes of men, and making him vile in the sight of
Heaven.'

'My love,' said Montreville, 'your simplicity and ignorance of the world
make you attach far too great importance to Hargrave's little
irregularities. I am persuaded that a wife whom he loved would have no
cause to complain of them.'

'She would at least have no _right_ to complain,' returned Laura, 'if,
knowing them, she chose to make the hazardous experiment.'

'But I am certain,' said Montreville, 'that a passion such as he
evidently feels for you, would ensure his perfect reformation; and that
a heart so warm as Hargrave's, would readily acknowledge all the claims
upon a husband's and a father's love.'

Laura held down her head, and, for a moment, surrendered her fancy to
prospects, rainbow-like, bright but unreal. Spite of the dictates of
sober sense, the vision was cheering; and a smile dimpled her cheek
while she said, 'But since this reformation is so easy and so certain,
would it be a grievous delay to wait for its appearance.'

'Ah Laura!' Montreville began, 'this is no time for--' 'Nay, now,'
interrupted Laura, sportively laying her hand upon his mouth,
'positively I will be no more lectured tonight. Besides I have got a new
book for you from the library, and the people insisted upon having it
returned to-morrow.' 'You are a spoiled girl,' said Montreville, fondly
caressing her, and he dropped the subject with the less reluctance,
because he believed that his wishes, aided as he perceived they were, by
an advocate in Laura's own breast, were in a fair train for
accomplishment. He little knew how feeble was the influence of
inclination over the decisions of her self-controlling spirit.

To prevent him from returning to the topic he had quitted, she read
aloud to him till his hour of rest; and then retired to her chamber to
labour as formerly, till the morning was far advanced.




CHAPTER XVII


Laura had it now in her power to discharge her debt to the surgeon, and
she was resolved that it should immediately be paid. When, therefore, he
called in the morning to make his daily visit, she met him before he
entered Montreville's chamber, and requested to speak with him in the
parlour.

She began by saying, she feared that medicine could be of little use to
her father, to which Dr Flint readily assented, declaring, in his dry
way, that generous food and open air would benefit him more than all the
drugs in London. Laura begged him to say explicitly so to the Captain,
and to give that as a reason for declining to make him any more
professional visits. She then presented him a paper containing four
guineas, which she thought might be the amount of his claim. He took the
paper, and deliberately unfolding it, returned one-half of its contents;
saying, that his account had been settled so lately, that the new one
could not amount to more than the sum he retained. Laura, who having now
no favour to beg, no debt that she was unable to pay, was no longer
ashamed of her poverty, easily opened to Dr Flint so much of her
situation as was necessary to instruct him in the part he had to act
with Montreville. He made no offer to continue his visits, even as an
acquaintance, but readily undertook all that Laura required of him,
adding, 'Indeed, Miss Montreville, I should have told your father long
ago that physic was useless to him, but whimsical people must have
something to amuse them, and if he had not paid for my pills, he would
for some other man's.' He then went to Montreville, and finding him in
better spirits than he had lately enjoyed, actually succeeded in
persuading him, for that day at least, that no new prescription was
necessary, and that he could continue to use the old without the
inspection of a surgeon.

Laura's mind was much relieved by her having settled this affair to her
wish; and when the Doctor was gone, she sat down cheerfully to her
drawing. Her meeting with Hargrave had lightened her heart of a load
which had long weighed upon it more heavily than she was willing to
allow; and, spite of poverty, she was cheerful. 'I have now only hunger
and toil to endure,' thought she, smiling as gaily as if hunger and toil
had been trifles; 'but light will be my labours, for by them I can in
part pay back my debt of life to my dear kind father. I am no more
forlorn and deserted, for he is come who is sunshine to Laura's soul.
The cloud that darkened him has passed away, and he will brighten all my
after life. Oh fondly beloved! with thee I would have been content to
tread the humblest path; but, if we must climb the steeps, together we
will court the breeze, together meet the storm. No time shall change the
love I bear thee. Thy step, when feeble with age, shall still be music
to Laura's ear. When the lustre of the melting eyes is quenched, when
the auburn ringlet fades to silver, dearer shalt thou be to me than in
all the pride of manly beauty. And when at last the dust shall cover us,
one tree shall shelter our narrow beds, and the wind that fans the
flowers upon thy grave, shall scatter their fallen leaves upon mine.'

Casting these thoughts into the wild extempore measures which are
familiar to the labourers of her native mountains,[A] Laura was singing
them to one of the affecting melodies of her country, her sweet voice
made more sweet by the magic of real tenderness, when the door opened,
and Hargrave himself entered.

 [A] See Jamieson's Popular Ballads, Vol. ii, p. 558.

He came, resolved to exert all his influence, to urge every plea which
the affection of Laura would allow him, in order to extort her consent
to their immediate union; and he was too well convinced of his power to
be very diffident of success. Laura ceased her song in as much confusion
as if her visitor had understood the language in which it was composed,
or could have known himself to be the subject of it. He had been
listening to its close, and now urged her to continue it, but was unable
to prevail. He knew that she was particularly sensible to the charms of
music. He had often witnessed the effect of her own pathetic voice upon
her feelings; and he judged that no introduction could be more proper to
a conference in which he intended to work on her sensibility. He
therefore begged her to sing a little plaintive air with which she had
often drawn tears from his eyes. But Laura knew that, as her father was
still in bed, she could not without rudeness avoid a long tête à tête
with Hargrave, and therefore she did not choose to put her composure to
any unnecessary test. She excused herself from complying with his
request, but glad to find any indifferent way to pass the time, she
offered to sing, if he would allow her to choose her own song, and then
began a lively air, which she executed with all the vivacity that she
could command. The style of it was quite at variance with Hargrave's
present humour and design. He heard it with impatience; and scarcely
thanking her said, 'Your spirits are high this morning, Miss
Montreville.'

'They are indeed,' replied Laura, gaily, 'I hope you have no intention
to make them otherwise.'

'Certainly not; though they are little in unison with my own. The
meditations of a restless, miserable night, have brought me to you.'

'Is it the usual effect of a restless night to bring you abroad so early
the next morning?' said Laura, anxious to avoid a trial of strength in a
sentimental conference.

'I will be heard seriously,' said Hargrave, colouring with anger, 'and
seriously too I must be answered.'

'Nay,' said Laura, 'if you look so tremendous I shall retreat without
hearing you at all.'

Hargrave, who instantly saw that he had not chosen the right road to
victory, checked his rising choler--'Laura,' said he, 'you have yourself
made me the victim of a passion ungovernable--irresistible; and it is
cruel--it is ungenerous in you to sport with my uneasiness.'

'Do not give the poor passion such hard names,' said Laura, smiling.
'Perhaps you have never tried to resist or govern it.'

'As soon might I govern the wind,' cried Hargrave, vehemently,--'as soon
resist the fires of Heaven. And why attempt to govern it?'

'Because,' answered Laura, 'it is weak, it is sinful, to submit
unresisting to the bondage of an imperious passion.'

'Would that you too would submit unresisting to its bondage!' said
Hargrave, delighted to have made her once more serious. 'But if this
passion is sinful,' continued he, 'my reformation rests with you alone.
Put a period to my lingering trial. Consent to be mine, and hush all
these tumults to rest.'

'Take care how you furnish me with arguments against yourself,' returned
Laura, laughing. 'Would it be my interest, think you, to lull all these
transports to such profound repose?'

'Be serious Laura, I implore you. Well do you know that my love can end
only with my existence, but I should no longer be distracted with these
tumultuous hopes and fears if--' 'Oh,' cried Laura, interrupting him,
'hope is too pleasing a companion for you to wish to part with that;
and,' added she, a smile and a blush contending upon her cheek, 'I begin
to believe that your fears are not very troublesome.' 'Ah Laura,' said
Hargrave sorrowfully, 'you know not what you say. There are moments when
I feel as if you were already lost to me--and the bare thought is
distraction. Oh if you have pity for real suffering,' continued he,
dropping on his knees, 'save me from the dread of losing you; forget the
hour of madness in which I offended you. Restore to me the time when you
owned that I was dear to you. Be yet more generous, and give me
immediate, unalienable right to your love.'

'You forget, Colonel Hargrave,' said Laura, again taking sanctuary in an
appearance of coldness; 'you forget that six months ago I fixed two
years of rectitude as the test of your repentance, and that you were
then satisfied with my decision.'

'I would then have blessed you for any sentence that left me a hope,
however distant; but now the time when I may claim your promise seems at
such a hopeless distance--Oh Laura, let me but prevail with you; and I
will bind myself by the most solemn oaths to a life of unsullied
purity.'

'No oaths,' replied Laura with solemnity, 'can strengthen the ties that
already bind you to a life of purity. That you are of noble rank, calls
you to be an example to others; and the yet higher distinction of an
immortal spirit bids you strive after virtues that may never meet the
eye of man. Only convince me that such are the objects of your ambition,
and I shall no longer fear to trust with you my improvement and my
happiness.'

As she spoke unusual animation sparkled in her eyes, and tinged her
delicate cheek with brighter colouring. 'Lovely, lovely creature!' cried
Hargrave, in transport, 'give but thyself to these fond arms, and may
Heaven forsake me if I strive not to make thee blest beyond the sweetest
dreams of youthful fancy.'

'Alas!' said Laura, 'even your affection would fail to bless a heart
conscious of acting wrong.'

'Where is the wrong,' said Hargrave, gathering hope from the relenting
tenderness of her voice, 'Where is the wrong of yielding to the
strongest impulse of nature--or, to speak in language more like your
own, where is the guilt of submitting to an ordinance of Heaven's own
appointment?'

'Why,' replied Laura, 'will you force me to say what seems unkind? Why
compel me to remind you that marriage was never meant to sanction the
unholy connection of those whose principles are discordant?'

'Beloved of my heart,' said Hargrave, passionately kissing her hand,
'take me to thyself, and mould me as thou wilt. I swear to thee that not
even thine own life shall be more pure, more innocent than mine. Blest
in thy love, what meaner pleasure could allure me. Oh yield then, and
bind me for ever to virtue and to thee.'

Laura shook her head. 'Ah Hargrave,' said she, with a heavy sigh,
'before you can love and practice the purity which reaches the heart,
far other loves must warm, far other motives inspire you.'

'No other love can ever have such power over me,' said Hargrave with
energy. 'Be but thou and thy matchless beauty the prize, and every
difficulty is light, every sacrifice trivial.'

'In little more than a year,' said Laura, 'I shall perhaps ask some
proofs of the influence you ascribe to me; but till then'--

'Long, long before that time,' cried Hargrave, striking his forehead in
agony, 'you will be lost to me for ever,' and he paced the room in
seeming despair. Laura looked at him with a pity not unmixed with
surprise. 'Hear me for a moment,' said she, with the soothing voice and
gentle aspect, which had always the mastery of Hargrave's feelings, and
he was instantly at her side, listening with eagerness to every tone
that she uttered, intent on every variation of her countenance.

'There are circumstances,' she continued, her transparent cheek glowing
with bright beauty, tears in her downcast eyes trembling through the
silken lashes--'There are circumstances that may change me, but time and
absence are not of the number. Be but true to yourself, and you have
nothing to fear. After this assurance, I trust it will give you little
pain to hear that, till the stipulated two years are ended, if we are to
meet, it must not be without witnesses.'

'Good Heavens! Laura, why this new, this intolerable restriction--What
can induce you thus wilfully to torment me?'

'Because,' answered the blushing Laura, with all her natural simplicity,
'because I might not always be able to listen to reason and duty rather
than to you.'

'Oh that I could fill thee with a love that should for ever silence the
cold voice of reason!' cried Hargrave, transported by her confession;
and, no longer master of himself, he would have clasped her in his arms.
But Laura, to whose mind his caresses ever recalled a dark page in her
story, recoiled as from pollution, the glow of ingenuous modesty giving
place to the paleness of terror.

No words envenomed with the bitterest malice, could have stung Hargrave
to such frenzy as the look and the shudder with which Laura drew back
from his embrace. His eyes flashing fire, his pale lips quivering with
passion, he reproached her with perfidy and deceit; accused her of
veiling her real aversion under the mask of prudence and principle; and
execrated his own folly in submitting so long to be the sport of a
cold-hearted, tyrannical, obdurate woman. Laura stood for some minutes
gazing on him with calm compassion. But displeased at his groundless
accusations, she disdained to soothe his rage. At last, wearied of
language which, for the present, expressed much more of hatred than of
love, she quietly moved towards the door. 'I see you can be very calm,
Madam,' said Hargrave, stopping her, 'and I can be as calm as yourself,'
added he, with a smile like a moon-beam on a thunder cloud, making the
gloom more fearful.

'I hope you soon will be so,' replied Laura coldly. 'I am so now,' said
Hargrave, his voice half-choked with the effort to suppress his passion.
'I will but stay to take leave of your father, and then free you for
ever from one so odious to you.'

'That must be as you please, Sir,' said Laura, with spirit; 'but, for
the present, I must be excused from attending you.' She then retired to
her own chamber, which immediately adjoined the painting-room; and with
tears reflected on the faint prospects of happiness that remained for
the wife of a man whose passions were so ungovernable. Even the ardour
of his love, for which vanity would have found ready excuse in many a
female breast, was to Laura subject of unfeigned regret, as excluding
him from the dominion of better motives, and the pursuit of nobler ends.

Hargrave was no sooner left to himself than his fury began to evaporate.
In a few minutes he was perfectly collected, and the first act of his
returning reason was to upbraid him with his treatment of Laura. 'Is it
to be wondered that she shrinks from me,' said he, the tears of
self-reproach rising to his eyes, 'when I make her the sport of all my
frantic passions? But she shall never again have cause to complain of
me--let but her love this once excuse me, and henceforth I will treat
her with gentleness like her own.'

There is no time in the life of a man so tedious, as that which passes
between the resolution to repair a wrong, and the opportunity to make
the reparation. Hargrave wondered whether Laura would return to conduct
him to her father; feared that she would not--hoped that she
would--thought he heard her footstep--listened--sighed--and tried to
beguile the time by turning over her drawings.

Almost the first that met his eye, was a sketch of features well known
to him. He started and turned pale. He sought for a name upon the
reverse; there was none, and he again breathed more freely. 'This must
be accident,' said he; 'De Courcy is far from London--yet it is very
like;' and he longed more than ever for Laura's appearance. He sought
refuge from his impatience in a book which lay upon the table. It was
the Pleasures of Hope, and marked in many parts of the margins with a
pencil. One of the passages so marked was that which begins,

    'Thy pencil traces on the lover's thought
    'Some cottage home, from towns and toil remote,
    'Where love and lore may claim alternate hours,' &c.

And Hargrave surrendered himself to the pleasing dream that Laura had
thought of him, while she approved the lines. 'Her name, written by her
own snowy fingers, may be here,' said he, and he turned to the
title-page, that he might press it, with a lover's folly, to his
lips--The title-page was inscribed with the name of Montague De Courcy.

The glance of the basilisk was not more powerful. Motionless he gazed on
the words, till all the fiends of jealousy taking possession of his
soul, he furiously dashed the book upon the ground 'False, false siren,'
he cried, 'is this the cause of all your coldness--your loathing?' And
without any wish but to exclude her for ever from his sight, he rushed
like a madman out of the house.

He darted forward, regardless of the snow that was falling on his
uncovered head, till it suddenly occurred to him that he would not
suffer her to triumph in the belief of having deceived him. 'No,' cried
he, 'I will once more see that deceitful face; reproach her with her
treachery; enjoy her confusion, and then spurn her from me for ever.'

He returned precipitately to the house; and, flying up stairs, saw
Laura, the traces of melancholy reflection on her countenance, waiting
for admission at her father's door. 'Madam', said he, in a voice
scarcely articulate, 'I must speak with you for a few minutes.' 'Not for
a moment, Sir,' said Laura, laying her hand upon the lock. 'Yes, by
Heaven, you shall hear me,' cried Hargrave; and rudely seizing her, he
forced her into the painting-room, and bolted the door.

'Answer me,' said he fiercely, 'how came that book into your
possession?' pointing to it as it still lay upon the floor. 'When have
you this infernal likeness? Speak!'

Laura looked at the drawing, then at the book, and at once understood
the cause of her lover's frenzy. Sincere compassion filled her heart;
yet she felt how unjust was the treatment which she received; and, with
calm dignity, said, 'I will answer all your questions, and then you will
judge whether you have deserved that I should do so.'

'Whom would not that face deceive?' said Hargrave, gnashing his teeth in
agony. 'Speak sorceress--tell me, if you dare, that this is not the
portrait of De Courcy--that he is not the lover for whom I am loathed
and spurned.'

'That is the portrait of De Courcy,' replied Laura, with the simple
majesty of truth. 'It is the sketch from which I finished a picture for
his sister. That book too is his,' and she stooped to lift it from the
ground. 'Touch not the vile thing,' cried Hargrave in a voice of
thunder. With quiet self-possession, Laura continued, 'Mr De Courcy's
father was, as you know, the friend of mine. Mr De Courcy himself was,
when an infant, known to my father; and they met, providentially met,
when we had great need of a considerate friend. That friend Mr De Courcy
was to us, and no selfish motive sullied his benevolence; for he is not,
nor ever was, nor, I trust, ever will be, known to me as a lover!'

The voice of sober truth had its effect upon Hargrave, and he said, more
composedly, 'Will you then give me your word, that De Courcy is not, nor
ever will be, dear to you?'

'No!' answered Laura, 'I will not say so, for he must be loved wherever
his virtues are known; but I have no regard for him that should disquiet
you. It is not such,' continued she, struggling with the rising
tears--'it is not such as would pardon outrage, and withstand neglect,
and humble itself before unjust aspersion.'

'Oh Laura,' said Hargrave, at once convinced and softened, 'I must
believe you, or my heart will burst.'

'I have a right to be believed,' returned Laura, endeavouring to rally
her spirits. 'Now, then, release me, after convincing me that the
passion of which you boast so much, is consistent with the most insolent
disrespect, the most unfounded suspicion.' But Hargrave was again at her
feet, exhausting every term of endearment, and breathing forth the most
fervent petitions for forgiveness.

Tears, which she could no longer suppress, now streamed down Laura's
cheeks, while she said, 'How could you suspect me of the baseness of
pretending a regard which I did not feel, of confirming engagements from
which my affections revolted!' Hargrave, half wild with the sight of her
tears, bitterly reproached himself with his injustice; vowed that he
believed her all perfection; that, with all a woman's tenderness, she
possessed the truth and purity of angels, and that, could she this once
pardon his extravagance, he would never more offend. But Laura, vexed
and ashamed of her weakness, insisted on her release in a tone that
would be obeyed, and Hargrave, too much humbled to be daring,
unwillingly suffered her to retire.

In the faint hope of seeing her again, he waited till Montreville was
ready to admit him; but Laura was not with her father, nor did she
appear during the remainder of his visit. Desirous to know in what light
she had represented their affair, in order that his statement might
tally with hers, he again avoided the subject, resolving that next day
he should be better prepared to enter upon it. With this view, he
returned to Montreville's lodgings early in the next forenoon, hoping
for an opportunity to consult with Laura before seeing her father. He
was shewn into the parlour, which was vacant. He waited long, but Laura
came not. He sent a message to beg that she would admit him, and was
answered that she was sorry it was not in her power. He desired the
messenger to say that his business was important, but was told that Miss
Montreville was particularly engaged. However impatient, he was obliged
to submit. He again saw Montreville without entering upon the subject so
near his heart; and left the house without obtaining even a glimpse of
Laura.

The following day he was equally unsuccessful. He indeed saw Laura; but
it was only in the presence of her father, and she gave him no
opportunity of addressing her particularly. Finding that she adhered to
the resolution she had expressed, of seeing him no more without
witnesses, he wrote to her, warmly remonstrating against the barbarity
of her determination, and beseeching her to depart from it, if only in a
single instance. The billet received no answer, and Laura continued to
act as before.

Fretted almost to fever, Hargrave filled whole pages with the
description of his uneasiness, and complaints of the cruelty which
caused it. In conclusion, he assured Laura that he could no longer
refrain from confiding his situation to her father; and entreated to see
her, were it only to learn in what terms she would permit him to mention
their engagement. This letter was rather more successful than the
former; for, though Laura made no reply to the first part, she answered
the close by a few cautious lines, leaving Hargrave, excepting in one
point, at full liberty as to his communications with her father.

Thus authorized, he seized the first opportunity of conversing with
Montreville. He informed him that he had reason to believe himself not
indifferent to Laura; but that, some of his little irregularities coming
to her knowledge, she had sentenced him to a probation which was yet to
continue for above a year. Though Hargrave guarded his words so as to
avoid direct falsehood, the conscious crimson rose to his face as he
uttered this subterfuge. But he took instant refuge in the idea that he
had no choice left; and that, if there was any blame, it in fact
belonged to Laura, for forcing him to use concealment. He did yet more.
He erected his head, and planted his foot more firmly, as he thought,
that what he dared to do he dared to justify, were he not proud to yield
to the commands of love, and humanely inclined to spare the feelings of
a sick man. He proceeded to assure Montreville, that though he must
plead guilty to a few youthful indiscretions, Laura might rely upon his
constancy and fidelity. Finally, addressing himself to what he conceived
to be the predominant failing of age, he offered to leave the grand
affair of settlements to Montreville's own decision; demanding only in
return, that the father would use his interest, or even his authority,
if necessary, to obtain his daughter's consent to an immediate union.

Montreville answered, that he had long desisted from the use of
authority with Laura, but that his influence was at the Colonel's
service; and he added, with a smile, that he believed that neither would
be very necessary.

In consequence of this promise, Montreville sought an opportunity of
conversing on this subject with his daughter; but she shewed such
extreme reluctance to enter upon it, and avoided it with such sedulous
care, that he could not immediately execute his design. He observed,
too, that she looked ill, that she was pale and languid. Though she
would not confess any ailment, he could not help fearing that all was
not right; and he waited the appearance of recovered strength, ere he
should enter on a topic which was never heard by her without strong
emotion. But Laura looked daily more wretched. Her complexion became
wan, her eyes sunk, and her lips colourless.

Hargrave observed the change, and, half persuaded that it was the effect
of his own capricious behaviour at their last interview, he became more
anxious for a private conference, in which his tenderness might sooth
her to forgetfulness of his errors. When she was quitting the room, he
often followed her to the door, and entreated to be heard for a single
moment. But the utmost he could obtain was a determined 'I cannot,' or a
hasty 'I dare not,' and in an instant she had vanished.

Indeed watching and abstinence, though the chief, were not the only
causes of Laura's sickly aspect. Hargrave's violence had furnished her
with new and painful subjects of meditation. While yet she thought him
all perfection, he had often confessed to her the warmth of his temper,
with a candour which convinced her (anxious as she was to be so
convinced) that he was conscious of his natural tendency, and vigilantly
guarded it from excess; consequently, that to the energy of the
passionate he united the justice of the cool. She had never witnessed
any instance of his violence; for since their first acquaintance, she
had herself, at least while she was present, been his only passion. All
things unconnected with it were trivial in his estimation; and till the
hour which had roused her caution, she had unconsciously soothed this
tyrant of his soul with perpetual incense, by proofs of her tenderness,
which, though unobserved by others, were not lost upon the vanity of
Hargrave. Successful love shedding a placid gentleness upon his really
polished manners, he had, without intention to deceive, completely
misled Laura's judgment of his character. Now he had turned her eyes
from the vision, and compelled her to look upon the reality; and with
many a bitter tear she lamented that ever she suffered her peace to
depend upon an union which, even if accomplished, promised to compensate
transient rapture with abiding disquiet.

But still fondly attached, Laura took pleasure in persuading herself
that a mere defect of temper was not such a fault as entitled her to
withdraw her promise; and having made this concession, she soon
proceeded to convince herself, that Hargrave's love would make ample
amends for occasional suffering, however severe. Still she assured
herself that if, at the stipulated time, he produced not proofs of real
improvement, much more if that period were stained with actual vice, she
would, whatever it might cost her, see him no more. She determined to
let nothing move her to shorten his probation, nor to be satisfied
without the strictest scrutiny into the manner in which it had been
spent.

Aware of the difficulty of withstanding the imploring voice, the
pleading eyes of Hargrave, she would not venture into temptation for the
mere chance of escape; and adhered to her resolution of affording him no
opportunity to practise on her sensibility. Nor was this a slight
exercise of self-denial, for no earthly pleasure could bring such joy to
Laura's heart, as the assurance, however oft repeated, that she was
beloved. Yet, day after day, she withstood his wishes, and her own; and
generally spent the time of his visits in drawing.

Meanwhile, her delicate face and slender form gave daily greater
indications of malady. Montreville, utterly alarmed, insisted upon
sending for medical advice; but Laura, with a vehemence most unusual to
her, opposed this design, telling him, that if he persisted in it,
vexation would cause the reality of the illness which at present was
merely imaginary.

The Captain was however the only member of the family who did not
conjecture the true cause of Laura's decay. The servant who attended
her, reported to her mistress, that the slender repast was always
presented, untouched by Laura, to her father; that her drink was only
water, her fare coarse and scanty; and that often, a few morsels of dry
bread were the only sustenance of the day. Mrs Stubbs, who entertained a
suitable contempt for poverty, was no sooner informed of these
circumstances, than she recollected with indignation the awe with which
Laura had involuntarily inspired her; and determined to withdraw part of
her misplaced respect. But Laura had an air of command, a quiet majesty
of demeanour, that seemed destined to distance vulgar impertinence; and
Mrs Stubbs was compelled to continue her unwilling reverence.
Determined, however, that though her pride might suffer, her interest
should not, she dropped such hints as induced Laura to offer the payment
of the lodgings a week in advance, an offer which was immediately
accepted.

In spite of Laura's utmost diligence, this arrangement left her almost
pennyless. She was obliged, in that inclement season, to give up even
the comfort of a fire; and more than once passed the whole night in
labouring to supply the wants of the following day.

In the meantime, Hargrave continued to pay his daily visits, and Laura
to frustrate all his attempts to speak with her apart. His patience was
entirely exhausted. He urged Montreville to the performance of his
promise, and Montreville often approached the subject with his daughter,
but she either evaded it, or begged with such pathetic earnestness to be
spared a contest which she was unable to bear, that, when he looked on
the sickly delicacy of her frame, he had not courage to persecute her
further. Convinced, however, that Laura's affections were completely
engaged, he became daily more anxious that she should not sacrifice them
to what he considered as mistaken prudence; especially since Hargrave
had dropped a hint, which, though not so intended, had appeared to
Montreville to import, that his addresses, if rejected in the present
instance, would not be renewed at the distant date to which Laura chose
to postpone them.

The father's constant anxiety for the health and happiness of his child
powerfully affected both his strength and spirits; and he was soon more
languid and feeble than ever. His imagination, too, betrayed increased
symptoms of its former disease, and he became more persuaded that he was
dying. The selfishness of a feeble mind attended his ailments, and he
grew less tender of his daughter's feelings, less fearful to wound her
sensibility. To hints of his apprehensions for his own life, succeeded
direct intimations of his conviction that his end was approaching; and
Laura listened, with every gradation of terror, to prophetic forebodings
of the solitude, want, and temptation, to which she must soon be
abandoned.

Pressed by Hargrave's importunities, and weary of waiting for a
voluntary change in Laura's conduct towards her lover, Montreville at
last resolved that he would force the subject which she was so anxious
to shun. For this purpose, detaining her one morning in his apartment,
he entered on a melancholy description of the perils which await
unprotected youth and beauty; and explicitly declared his conviction,
that to these perils he must soon leave his child. Laura endeavoured, as
she was wont, to brighten his dark imagination, and to revive his
fainting hope. But Montreville would now neither suffer her to enliven
her prospects, nor to divert him from the contemplation of them. He
persisted in giving way to his dismal anticipations, till, spite of her
efforts, Laura's spirits failed her, and she could scarcely refrain from
shedding tears.

Montreville saw that she was affected; and fondly putting his arm round
her, continued, 'Yet still, my sweet Laura, you, who have been the pride
of my life, you can soften to me the bitterness of death. Let me but
commit you to the affection of the man whom I know that you prefer, and
my fears and wishes shall linger no more in this nether world.'

'Oh Sir,' said Laura, 'I beseech, I implore you to spare me on this
subject.' 'No!' answered Montreville, 'I have been silent too long. I
have too long endangered your happiness, in the dread of giving you
transient pain. I must recur to'--

'My dear father,' interrupted Laura, 'I have already spoken to you on
this subject--spoken to you with a freedom which I know not where I
found courage to assume. I can only repeat the same sentiments; and
indeed, indeed, unless you were yourself in my situation, you cannot
imagine with what pain I repeat them.'

'I would willingly respect your delicacy,' said Montreville, 'but this
is no time for frivolous scruples. I must soon leave thee, child of my
affections! My eyes must watch over thee no more; my ear must be closed
to the voice of thy complaining. Oh then, give me the comfort to know
that other love will console, other arms protect thee.'

'Long, long,' cried Laura, clasping his neck, 'be your affection my
joy--long be your arms my shelter. But alas! what love could console me
under the sense of acting wrong--what could protect me from an avenging
conscience?'

'Laura, you carry your scruples too far. When I look on these wan cheeks
and lustreless eyes, you cannot conceal from me that you are sacrificing
to these scruples your own peace, as well as that of others.'

'Ah Sir,' said Laura, who from mere despair of escape, gathered courage
to pursue the subject, 'What peace can I hope to find in a connexion
which reason and religion alike condemn?'

'That these have from childhood been your guides, has ever been my joy
and my pride,' returned Montreville. 'But in this instance you forge
shackles for yourself, and then call them the restraints of reason and
religion. It were absurd to argue on the reasonableness of preferring
wealth and title, with the man of your choice, to a solitary struggle
with poverty, or a humbling dependence upon strangers. And how, my dear
girl, can any precept of religion be tortured into a restriction on the
freedom of your choice?'

'Pardon me, Sir, the law which I endeavour to make my guide is here full
and explicit. In express terms it leaves me free to marry whom I will,
but with this grand reservation, that I marry "only in the Lord." It
cannot be thought that this limitation refers only to a careless assent
to the truth of the Gospel, shedding no purifying influence on the heart
and life. And can I hope for happiness in a wilful defiance of this
restriction?'

'If I could doubt,' said Montreville, avoiding a reply to what was
unanswerable--'if I could doubt that a union with Colonel Hargrave would
conduce to your happiness, never should I thus urge you. But I have no
reason to believe that his religious principles are unsound, though the
follies incident to his sex, and the frailty of human nature, may have
prevailed against him.'

'My dear Sir,' cried Laura impatiently, 'how can you employ such
qualifying language to express--what my soul sickens at. How can my
father urge his child to join to pollution this temple, (and she laid
her hand emphatically on her breast) which my great master has offered
to hallow as his own abode? No! the express command of Heaven forbids
the sacrilege, for I cannot suppose that when man was forbidden to
degrade himself by a union with vileness, the precept was meant to
exclude the sex whose feebler passions afford less plea for yielding to
their power.'

'Whither does this enthusiasm hurry you?' said Montreville, in
displeasure. 'Surely you will not call your marriage with Colonel
Hargrave a union with vileness.' 'Yes,' returned Laura, all the glow of
virtuous animation fading to the paleness of anguish, 'if his vices make
him vile, I must call it so.'

'Your language is much too free, Laura, as your notions are too rigid.
Is it dutiful, think you, to use such expressions in regard to a
connexion which your father approves? Will you call it virtue to sport
with your own happiness, with the peace of a heart that doats upon
you--with the comfort of your dying parent?'

'Oh my father,' cried Laura, sinking on her knees, 'my spirit is already
bowed to the earth--do not crush it with your displeasure. Rather
support my feeble resolution, lest, knowing the right, I should not have
power to choose it.'

'My heart's treasure,' said Montreville, kissing the tears from her
eyes, 'short ever is my displeasure with thee: for I know that though
inexperience may mislead thy judgment, no pleasure can bribe, no fear
betray thy inflexible rectitude. Go on then--convince me if thou canst,
that thou art in the right to choose thy portion amidst self-denial, and
obscurity, and dependence.'

'Would that I were able to convince you,' returned Laura, 'and then you
would no longer add to the difficulties of this fearful struggle. Tell
me then, were Colonel Hargrave your son, and were I what I cannot name,
could any passion excuse, any circumstances induce you to sanction the
connexion for which you now plead?'

'My dear love,' said Montreville, 'the cases are widely different. The
world's opinion affixes just disgrace to the vices in your sex, which in
ours it views with more indulgent eyes.' 'But I,' returned Laura, 'when
I took upon me the honoured name of Christian, by that very act became
bound that the opinion of the world should not regulate my principles,
nor its customs guide my practice. Perhaps even the worst of my sex
might plead that the voice of a tempter lured them to perdition; but
what tongue can speak the vileness of that tempter!--Could I promise to
_obey_ him who wilfully leads others to their ruin! Could I _honour_ him
who deceives the heart that trusteth in him! Could I _love_ him who
could look upon a fellow creature--once the image of the highest, now
humbled below the brutes that perish--upon the heir of immortality,
immortal only to misery, and who could, unmoved, unpitying, seek in the
fallen wretch a minister of pleasure!--Love!' continued Laura,
forgetting in the deformity of the hideous image that it was capable of
individual application, 'words cannot express the energy of my
abhorrence!'

'Were Hargrave such--or to continue such'--said Montreville--'Hargrave!'
cried Laura, almost with a shriek, 'Oh God forbid--And yet'--She covered
her face with her hands, and cold drops stood on her forehead, as she
remembered how just cause she had to dread that the portrait might be
his.

'Hargrave,' continued Montreville, 'is not an abandoned profligate,
though he may not have escaped the follies usual to men of his rank; and
he has promised, if you will be favourable to him, to live henceforward
in irreproachable purity. Heaven forgives the sins that are forsaken,
and will you be less lenient?'

'Joyfully will I forgive,' replied Laura, 'when I am assured that they
are indeed abhorred and forsaken'--'They are already forsaken,' said
Montreville; 'it rests with you to confirm Hargrave in the right, by
consenting to his wishes.'

'I ask but the conviction which time alone can bring,' said Laura, 'and
then'--

'And how will you bear it, Laura, if, weary of your perverse delays,
Hargrave should relinquish his suit? How would you bear to see the
affections you have trifled with transferred to another?'

'Better, far better,' answered Laura, 'than to watch the deepening of
those shades of iniquity, that close at last into outer darkness: better
than to see each guilty day advance and seal our eternal separation. To
lose his affection,' continued she with a sickly smile, 'I would bear as
I strive to bear my other burdens; and should they at last prove too
heavy for me, they can but weigh me to the earth, where they and I must
soon rest together.'

'Talk not so, beloved child,' said Montreville, 'a long life is before
you. All the joys that ambition, all the joys that love can offer, are
within your power. A father invites, implores, I will not say commands,
you to accept them. The man of your choice, to whom the proudest might
aspire, whom the coldest of your sex might love, entreats you to confirm
him in the ways of virtue. Consent then to this union, on which my heart
is set, while yet it can be hallowed by the blessing of your dying
father.'

'Oh take pity on me,' Laura would have said, and 'league not with my
weak heart to betray me,' but convulsive sobs were all that she could
utter. 'You consent then,' said Montreville, choosing so to interpret
her silence--'you have yielded to my entreaties, and made me the
happiest of fathers.' 'No! no!' cried Laura, tossing her arms
distractedly, 'I will do right though my heart should break. No, my
father, my dear honoured father, for whom I would lay down my life, not
even your entreaties shall prevail.'

'Ungrateful child,' said Montreville; 'what could you have pleaded for,
that your father would have refused--your father whom anxiety for your
welfare has brought to the gates of the grave, whose last feeling shall
be love to you, whose last words shall bless you.'

'Oh most merciful, most gracious,' cried Laura, clasping her hands, and
raising her eyes in resigned anguish, 'wilt thou suffer me to be tempted
above what I am able to bear! Oh my dear father, if you have pity for
misery unutterable, misery that cannot know relief, spare me now, and
suffer me to think--if to think be yet possible.'

'Hear me but for one moment more,' said Montreville, who from the
violence of her emotion gathered hopes of success. 'Oh no! no!' cried
Laura, 'I must leave you while yet I have the power to do right.' And,
darting from his presence, she shut herself into her chamber. There,
falling on her knees, she mingled bitter expressions of anguish, with
fervent prayers for support, and piteous appeals for mercy.

Becoming by degrees more composed, she endeavoured to fortify her
resolution by every argument of reason and religion which had formerly
guided her determination. She turned to the passages of Scripture which
forbid the unequal yoke with the unbeliever; convinced that the
prohibition applies no less to those whose lives are unchristian, than
to those whose faith is unsound. She asked herself whether she was able
to support those trials (the severest of all earthly ones,) which the
wife of a libertine must undergo; and whether, in temptations which she
voluntarily sought, and sorrows which she of choice encountered, she
should be entitled to expect the divine support. 'Holy Father,' she
cried, 'what peace can enter where thy blessing is withheld! and shall I
dare to mock thee with a petition for that blessing on a union which
thou has forbidden! May I not rather fear that this deliberate
premeditated guilt may be the first step in a race of iniquity! May I
not dread to share in the awful sentence of those who are joined to
their idols, and be "let alone" to wander in the way that leadeth to
destruction?'

Yet, as oft as her father's entreaties rose to her recollection, joined
with the image of Hargrave--of Hargrave beseeching, of Hargrave
impassioned--Laura's resolution faltered; and half-desirous to deceive
herself, she almost doubted of the virtue of that firmness that could
withstand a parent's wish. But Laura was habitually suspicious of every
opinion that favoured her inclinations, habitually aware of the
deceitfulness of her own heart; and she did not, unquestioned, harbour
for a moment the insidious thought that flattered her strongest wishes.
'And had my father commended me to marry where I was averse,' said she,
'would I then have hesitated? Would my father's command have prevailed
on me then to undertake duties which I was unlikely to perform? No:
there I would have resisted. There, authority greater than a father's
would have empowered me to resist; and I know that I should have
resisted even unto death. And shall mere inclination give more firmness
than a sense of duty! Yet, Oh dear father, think me not unmindful of all
your love--or forgetful of a debt that began with my being. For your
sake cold and hunger shall be light to me--for you poverty and toil
shall be pleasing. But what solitary sorrow could equal the pang with
which I should blush before my children for the vices of their father!
What is the wasting of famine to the mortal anguish of watching the
declining love, the transferred desires, the growing depravity of my
husband!'

In thoughts and struggles like these, Laura passed the day alone.
Montreville, though disappointed at his ill success with his daughter,
was not without hope that a lover's prayers might prevail where a
father's were ineffectual; and believing that the season of Laura's
emotion was a favourable one for the attempt, he was anxious for the
daily visit of Hargrave.

But, for the first time since his meeting with Laura, Hargrave did not
appear. In her present frame, Laura felt his absence almost a relief;
but Montreville was uneasy and half alarmed. It was late in the evening
when a violent knocking at the house door startled Montreville, who was
alone in his apartment; and the next minute, without being announced,
Hargrave burst into the room. His hair was dishevelled, his dress
neglected, and his eyes had a wildness which Montreville had never
before seen in them. Abruptly grasping Montreville's hand, he said, in a
voice of one struggling for composure, 'Have you performed your
promise--have you spoken with Laura?'

'I have,' answered Montreville; 'and have urged her, till, had you seen
her, you would yourself have owned that I went too far. But you look'--

'Has she consented,' interrupted Hargrave--'will she give herself to
me?'

Montreville shook his head. 'Her affections are wholly yours,' said he,
'you may yourself be more successful--I fervently wish that you may. But
why this strange emotion? What has happened?'

'Nothing, nothing,' said Hargrave, 'ask me no questions; but let me
speak instantly with Laura.'

'You shall see her,' returned Montreville, opening the door, and calling
Laura, 'Only I beseech you to command yourself, for my poor child is
already half distracted.' 'She is the fitter to converse with me,' said
Hargrave, with a ghastly smile, 'for I am upon the very verge of
madness.'

Laura came at her father's summons; but when she saw Hargrave, the
colour faded from her face, an universal tremour seized her, she
stopped, and leaned on the door for support. 'Colonel Hargrave wishes to
speak with you alone,' said Montreville, 'go with him to the parlour.'

'I cannot,' answered Laura, in words scarcely audible--'this night I
cannot.'

'I command you to go,' said the father in a tone which he had seldom
employed, and Laura instantly prepared to go. 'Surely, surely,' said
she, 'Heaven will not leave me to my own weakness, whilst I act in
obedience to you.'

Perceiving that she trembled violently, Hargrave offered her the support
of his circling arm; but Laura instantly disengaged herself. 'Will you
not lean on me, dearest Laura,' said he; 'perhaps it is for the last
time.'

'I hope,' answered Laura, endeavouring to exert her spirit, 'it will be
the last time that you will avail yourself of my father's authority to
constrain me.'

'Spare me your reproaches, Laura,' said Hargrave, 'for I am desperate.
All that I desire on earth--my life itself depends upon this hour.'

They entered the parlour, and Laura, sinking into a seat, covered her
eyes with her hand, and strove to prepare for answering this new call
upon her firmness.

Hargrave stood silent for some moments. Fain would he have framed a
resistless petition; for the events of that day had hastened the
unravelling of a tale which, once known to Laura, would, he knew, make
all his petitions vain. But his impatient spirit could not wait to
conciliate; and, seizing her hand, he said, with breathless eagerness,
'Laura, you once said that you loved me, and I believed you. Now to the
proof--and if that fail--But I will not distract myself with the
thought. You have allowed me a distant hope. Recall your sentence of
delay. Circumstances which you cannot--must not know, leave you but one
alternative. Be mine now, or you are for ever lost to me.'

Astonished at his words, alarmed by the ill-suppressed vehemence of his
manner, Laura tried to read his altered countenance, and feared she knew
not what. 'Tell me what you mean?' said she. 'What mean these strange
words--these wild looks. Why have you come at this late hour?'

'Ask me nothing,' cried Hargrave, 'but decide. Speak. Will you be
mine--now--to-morrow--within a few hours. Soon, very soon, it will be no
longer possible for you to choose.'

A hectic of resentment kindled in Laura's cheek at the threat of
desertion which she imagined to lurk beneath the words of Hargrave. 'You
have,' said she, 'I know not how, extended my conditional promise to
receive you as a friend far beyond what the terms of it could warrant.
In making even such an engagement, perhaps I condescended too far. But,
admitting it in your own sense, what right have you to suppose that I
am to be weakly terrified into renouncing a resolution formed on the
best grounds?'

'I have no right to expect it,' said Hargrave, in a voice of misery. 'I
came to you in desperation. I cannot--will not survive the loss of you;
and if I prevail not now, you must be lost to me.'

'What means this strange, this presuming haste?' said Laura. 'Why do you
seem thus wretched?'

'I am, indeed, most wretched. Oh Laura, thus on my knees I conjure you
to have pity on me;--or, if it will cost you a pang to lose me, have
pity on yourself. And if thy love be too feeble to bend thy stubborn
will, let a father's wishes, a father's prayers, come to its aid.'

'Oh Hargrave,' cried Laura, bursting into tears, 'how have I deserved
that you should lay on me this heavy load--that you should force me to
resist the entreaties of my father.'

'Do not--Oh do not resist them. Let a father's prayers--let the
pleadings of a wretch whose reason, whose life depends upon you, prevail
to move you.'

'Nothing shall move me,' said Laura, with the firmness of despair, 'for
I am used to misery, and will bear it.'

'And will you bear it too if driven from virtuous love--from domestic
joy, I turn to the bought smile of harlots, forget you in the haunts of
riot, or in the grave of a suicide?'

'Oh for mercy,' cried the terrified Laura, 'talk not so dreadfully. Be
patient--I implore you. Fear not to lose me. Be but virtuous, and no
power of man shall wrest me from you. In poverty--in sickness--in
disgrace itself I will cleave to you.'

'Oh, I believe it,' said Hargrave, moved even to woman's weakness, 'for
thou art an angel. But wilt though cleave to me in--'

'In what', said Laura.

'Ask me nothing--but yield to my earnest entreaty. Save me from the
horrors of losing you; and may Heaven forsake me if ever again I give
you cause to repent of your pity.'

Softened by his imploring looks and gestures, overpowered by his
vehemence, harassed beyond her strength, Laura seemed almost expiring.
But the upright spirit shared not the weakness of its frail abode.
'Cease to importune me,' said she;--'everlasting were my cause of
repentance, should I wilfully do wrong. You may break my heart--it is
already broken, but my resolution is immoveable.'

Fire flashed from the eyes of Hargrave; as, starting from her feet, he
cried, in a voice of frenzy, 'Ungrateful woman, you have never loved
me! You love nothing but the fancied virtue to which I am sacrificed.
But tremble, obdurate, lest I dash from me this hated life, and my
perdition be on your soul!'

'Oh no,' cried Laura, in an agony of terror, 'I will pray for you--pity
you,--what shall I say--love you as never man was loved. Would that it
were possible to do more!'

'Speak then your final rejection,' said Hargrave, grasping her hand with
convulsive energy; 'and abide by the consequence.' 'I must not fear
consequences,' said Laura, trembling in every limb. 'They are in the
hands of Heaven.' 'Then be this first fond parting kiss our last!' cried
Hargrave, and frantickly straining her to his breast, he rushed out of
the room.

Surprise, confusion, a thousand various feelings kept Laura for a while
motionless; till, Hargrave's parting words ringing in her ears, a
dreadful apprehension took possession of her mind. Starting from her
seat, and following him with her arms as if she could still have
detained him, 'Oh Hargrave, what mean you?' she cried. But Hargrave was
already beyond the reach of her voice; and, sinking to the ground, the
wretched Laura found refuge from her misery in long and deep
insensibility.

In the attitude in which she had fallen, her lily arms extended on the
ground, her death-like cheek resting upon one of them, she was found by
a servant who accidentally entered the room, and whose cries soon
assembled the family. Montreville alarmed hastened down stairs, and came
in just as the maid with the assistance of the landlady was raising
Laura, to all appearance dead.

'Merciful Heaven!' he exclaimed, 'what is this?' The unfeeling landlady
immediately expressed her opinion that Miss Montreville had died of
famine, declaring that she had long feared as much. The horror-struck
father had scarcely power to ask her meaning. 'Oh Sir,' said the maid,
sobbing aloud, 'I fear it is but too true--for she cared not for
herself, so you were but well--for she was the sweetest lady that ever
was born--and many a long night has she sat up toiling when the poorest
creature was asleep--for she never cared for herself.'

The whole truth flashed at once upon Montreville, and all the storm,
from which his dutiful child so well had sheltered him, burst upon him
in a moment. 'Oh Laura,' he cried, clasping her lifeless form, 'my only
comfort--my good--my gentle--my blameless child, has thou nourished thy
father with thy life! Oh why didst thou not let me die!' Then laying
his cheek to hers, 'Oh she is cold--cold as clay,' he cried, and the old
man wrung his hands, and sobbed like an infant.

Suddenly he ceased his lamentation; and pressing his hands upon his
breast, uttered a deep groan, and sunk down by the side of his senseless
child. His alarm and agitation burst again the blood-vessel, which
before had been slightly healed, and he was conveyed to bed without hope
of life. A surgeon was immediately found, but he administered his
prescription without expecting its success; and, departing, left the
dying Montreville to the care of the landlady.

The tender-hearted Fanny remained with Laura, and at last succeeded in
restoring her to animation. She then persuaded her to swallow a little
wine, and endeavoured to prevail upon her to retire to bed. But Laura
refused. 'No, my kind, good girl,' said she, laying her arm gratefully
on Fanny's shoulder. 'I must see my father before I sleep. I have
thwarted his will today, and will not sleep without his blessing.' Fanny
then besought her so earnestly not to go to the Captain's chamber, that
Laura, filled as every thought was with Hargrave, took alarm, and would
not be detained. The girl, dreading the consequences of the shock that
awaited her, threw her arms round her to prevent her departure. 'Let me
go,' cried Laura, struggling with her. 'He is ill; I am sure he is ill,
or he would have come to watch and comfort his wretched child.'

Fanny then, with all the gentleness in her power, informed Laura that
Montreville, alarmed by the sight of her fainting, had been suddenly
taken ill. Laura, in terror which effaced the remembrance of all her
former anguish, scarcely suffered her attendant to finish her relation;
but broke from her, and hurried as fast as her tottering limbs would
bear her to her father's chamber.

Softly, on tiptoe, she stole to his bed-side, and drew the curtain. His
eyes were closed, and death seemed already stamped on every feature.
Laura shuddered convulsively, and shrunk back in horror. But the dread
of scaring the spirit from its frail tenement suppressed the cry that
was rising to her lips. Trembling she laid her hand upon his. He looked
up, and a gleam of joy brightened in his dying eyes as they rested on
his daughter. 'Laura, my beloved,' said he, drawing her gently towards
him, 'thou has been the joy of my life. I thank God that thou art spared
to comfort me in death.'

Laura tried to speak the words of hope; but the sounds died upon her
lips.

After a pause of dread silence, Montreville said, 'This is the hour when
thy father was wont to bless thee. Come, and I will bless thee still.'

The weeping Laura sank upon her knees, and Montreville laid one hand
upon her hand, while she still held the other, as if wishing to detain
him. 'My best--my last blessing be upon thee, child of my heart,' said
he. 'The everlasting arms be around thee, when mine can embrace thee no
more. The Father of the fatherless be a parent to thee; support thee in
sorrow; crown thy youth with joy--thy gray hairs with honour; and, when
thou art summoned to thy kindred angels, may thy heart throb its last on
some breast kind and noble as thine own.'

Exhausted by the effort which he had made, Montreville sunk back on his
pillow; and Laura, in agony of supplication, besought Heaven to spare
him to her. 'Father of mercies!' she inwardly ejaculated, 'if it be
possible, save me, oh save me from this fearful stroke,--or take me in
pity from this desolate wilderness to the rest of thy chosen.'

The dead of night came on, and all but the wretched Laura was still.
Montreville breathed softly. Laura thought he slept, and stifled even
her sighs, lest they should wake him. In the stillness of the dead, but
in agony of suspence that baffles description, she continued to kneel by
his bed-side, and to return his relaxing grasp, till she felt a gentle
pressure of her hand, and looked up to interpret the gesture. It was the
last expression of a father's love. Montreville was gone!




CHAPTER XVIII


Colonel Hargrave had been the spoiled child of a weak mother, and he
continued to retain one characteristic of spoiled children; some
powerful stimulant was with him a necessary of life. He despised all
pleasures of regular recurrence and moderate degree; and even looked
down upon those who could be satisfied with such enjoyments, as on
beings confined to a meaner mode of existence. For more than a year
Laura had furnished the animating principle which kept life from
stagnation. When she was present, her beauty, her reserve, her
ill-concealed affection, kept his passions in constant play. In her
absence, the interpretations of looks and gestures, of which she had
been unconscious, and the anticipation of concessions which she thought
not of making, furnished occupation for the many hours which, for want
of literary habit, Colonel Hargrave was obliged to pass in solitude and
leisure, when deprived of fashionable company, public amusements, and
tolerable romances. In a little country town, these latter resources
were soon exhausted, and Hargrave had no associates to supply the blank
among his brother officers; some of whom were low both in birth and
education, and others, from various reasons, rather repelling, than
courting his intimacy. One had a pretty wife, another an unmarried
daughter; and the phlegmatic temperament and reserved manners of a third
tallied not with Hargrave's constitutional warmth. The departure of
Laura, therefore, deprived him at once of the only society that amused,
and the only object that interested him. He was prevented by the caution
of Mrs Douglas from attempting a correspondence with his mistress; and
his muse was exhausted with composing amatory sonnets, and straining
half-imaginary torments into reluctant rhimes.

He soon tired of making sentimental visits to the now deserted
Glenalbert, and grew weary of inspecting his treasures of pilfered
gloves and stray shoe-bows. His new system of reform, too, sat rather
heavily upon him. He was not exactly satisfied with its extent, though
he did not see in what respect he was susceptible of improvement. He had
some suspicion that it was not entitled to the full approbation of the
'wise, the pious, the sober-minded' observers, whom he imagined that
Laura had charged with the inspection of his conduct; and he reflected,
with a mixture of fear and impatience, that by them every action would
be reported to Laura, with all the aggravation of illiberal comment. For
though he did not distinctly define the idea to himself, he cherished a
latent opinion, that the 'wise' would be narrow-minded, the 'pious'
bigotted, and the 'sober-minded' cynical. The feeling of being watched
is completely destructive of comfort, even to those who have least to
conceal; and Colonel Hargrave sought relief at once from restraint and
ennui, in exhibiting, at the Edinburgh races, four horses which were the
envy of all the gentleman, and a person which was the admiration of all
the ladies. His thoughts dissipated, and his vanity gratified, his
passion had never, since its first existence, been so little troublesome
as during his stay in Edinburgh; and once or twice, as he caught a
languishing glance from a gay young heiress, he thought he had been a
little precipitate in changing his first designs in regard to Laura. But
alas! the races endure only for one short week; Edinburgh was deserted
by its glittering birds of passage; and Hargrave returned to his
quarters, to solitude, and to the conviction that, however obtained, the
possession of Laura was necessary to his peace.

Finding that her return was as uncertain as ever, he resolved to follow
her to London; and the caution of Mrs Douglas baffling his attempts to
procure her address from any other quarter, he contrived to obtain it by
bribing one of the under attendants of the Post Office to transcribe for
him the superscription of a letter to Miss Montreville. Delighted with
his success, he could not refuse himself the triumph of making it known
to Mrs Douglas; and, by calling to ask her commands for her young
friend, occasioned the letter of caution from her to Laura, which has
been formerly mentioned.

The moment he reached London, he hastened to make inquiries after the
abode of Captain Montreville; but his search was disappointed by the
accidents which he afterwards related to Laura. Day after day, he hoped
that Laura, by sending to Mr Baynard's chambers, would afford him the
means of discovering her residence. But every day ended in
disappointment; and Hargrave, who, intending to devote all his time to
her, had given no intimation to his friends of his arrival in town,
found himself as solitary, listless, and uncomfortable as before he
quitted Scotland.

One evening, when, to kill the time, he had sauntered into the Theatre,
he renewed his acquaintance with the beautiful Lady Bellamer. Two years
before, Hargrave had been the chief favourite of Lady Bellamer, then
Miss Walpole. Of all the danglers whom beauty, coquetry, and fifty
thousands pounds attracted to her train, none was admitted to such easy
freedom as Hargrave. She laughed more heartily at his wit, whispered
more familiarly in his ear, and slapped him more frequently on the cheek
than any of his rivals. With no other man was she so unreasonable,
troublesome, and ridiculous. In short, she ran through the whole routine
of flirtation, till her heart was entangled, so far at least as the
heart of a coquette is susceptible of that misfortune. But whatever
flames were kindled in the lady's breast, the gentleman, as is usual on
such occasions, escaped with a very slight tinge. While Miss Walpole was
present, his vanity was soothed by her blandishments, and his senses
touched by her charms; but, in her absence, he consoled himself with
half a dozen other affairs of the same kind.

Meanwhile Lord Bellamer entered the lists, and soon distinguished
himself from his competitors, by a question, which, with all her
admirers, Miss Walpole had not often answered. The lady hesitated; for
she could not help contrasting the insignificant starvling figure of her
suitor with the manly beauty of Hargrave's person. But Lord Bellamer had
a title in possession; Hargrave's was only reversionary. His Lordship's
estate, too, was larger than the Colonel's expectations. Besides, she
began to have doubts whether her favourite ever intended to propose the
important question; for though, to awaken his jealousy, she had herself
informed him of Lord Bellamer's pretensions, and though she had played
off the whole artillery of coquetry to quicken his operations, the young
man maintained a resolute and successful resistance. So, after some
fifty sighs given to the well turned leg and sparkling eyes of Hargrave,
Miss Walpole became Lady Bellamer; and this was the only change which
marriage effected in her; for no familiarity could increase her
indifference to Lord Bellamer, and no sacredness of connection can warm
the heart of a coquette. She continued equally assiduous in courting
admiration, equally daring in defying censure; and was content to
purchase the adulation of fools, at the expence of being obliged to the
charity of those who were good-natured enough to say, 'to be sure Lady
Bellamer is a little giddy, but I dare say she means no harm.'

Her husband's departure with his regiment for the continent, made no
change in her way of life, except to save her the trouble of defending
conduct which she would not reform. She continued in London, or at her
villa at Richmond Hill, to enter into every folly which others proposed,
or herself to project new ones.

Meanwhile Hargrave's duty called him to Scotland, where Lady Bellamer
and all her rivals in his attention were entirely forgotten amidst the
superior attractions of Laura; attractions which acted with all the
force of novelty upon a heart accustomed to parry only premeditated
attacks, and to resist charms that were merely corporeal. From an early
date in his acquaintance with Miss Montreville, he had scarcely
recollected the existence of Lady Bellamer, till he found himself in the
next box to her at the theatre. The pleasure that sparkled in the
brightest blue eyes in the world, the flush that tinged her face,
wherever the rouge permitted its natural tints to appear, convinced
Hargrave in a moment that her Ladyship's memory had been more tenacious;
and he readily answered to her familiar nod of invitation, by taking his
place at her side.

They entered into conversation with all the frankness of their former
intimacy. Lady Bellamer inquired how the Colonel had contrived to exist
during eighteen months of rustication; and gave him in return memoirs of
some of their mutual acquaintances. She had some wit, and an exuberance
of animal spirits; and she seasoned her nonsense with such lively
sallies, sly scandal, and adroit flattery, that Hargrave had scarcely
ever passed an evening so gaily. Once or twice, the composed grace, the
artless majesty of Laura, rose to his recollections, and he looked
absent and thoughtful. But his companion rallied him with so much
spirit, that he quickly recovered himself, and fully repaid the
amusement which he received. He accepted Lady Bellamer's invitation to
sup with her after the play, and left her at a late hour, with a promise
to visit her again the next day. From that time, the freedom of their
former intercourse was renewed; with this difference only, that Hargrave
was released from some restraint, by his escape from the danger of
entanglement which necessarily attends particular assiduities towards an
unmarried woman.

Let the fair enchantress tremble who approaches even in thought the
utmost verge of discretion. If she advance but one jot beyond that magic
circle, the evil spirit is ready to seize her, which before, feared even
to rise in her presence. Lady Bellamer became the victim of unpardonable
imprudence on her own part, and mere constitutional tendency on that of
her paramour. To a most blameable levity she sacrificed whatever
remained to be sacrificed, of her reputation, her virtue, and her
marriage vow; while the crime of Hargrave was not palliated by one
sentiment of genuine affection; for she by whom he fell was no more like
the object of his real tenderness, than those wandering lights that
arise from corruption and glimmer only to betray, are to the steady
sunbeam which enlightens, and guides, and purifies where it shines.

Their intercourse continued, with growing passion on the side of the
lady, and expiring inclination on that of the gentleman, till Lady
Bellamer informed him that the consequences of their guilt could not
long be concealed. Her Lord was about to return to his disgraced home;
and she called upon Hargrave to concert with her the means of exchanging
shackles which she would no longer endure for bonds which she could bear
with pleasure, and himself to stand forth the legal protector of his
unborn child. Hargrave heard her with a disgust which he scarcely strove
to conceal; for at that moment Laura stood before him, bewitching in
chastened love--respectable in saintly purity. He remembered that the
bare proposal of a degradation which Lady Bellamer had almost courted,
had once nearly banished the spotless soul from a tenement only less
pure than itself. In fancy he again saw through her casement the
wringing of those snowy hands, those eyes raised in agony, and the
convulsive heavings of that bosom which mourned his unlooked-for
baseness; and he turned from Lady Bellamer, inwardly cursing the hour
when his vows to Laura were sacrificed to a wanton.

The very day after this interview was that in which he accidentally
encountered Laura; and from that moment his whole desire was to make her
his own, before public report should acquaint her with his guilt. He
durst not trust to the strength of her affection for the pardon of so
foul an offence. He could not hope that she would again place confidence
in vows of reformation which had been so grossly violated. When the
proper self-distrust of Laura refused him the opportunity of making a
personal appeal to her sensibilities, he hoped that her father might
successfully plead his cause; and that before his guilt was known to
her, he might have made it at once her interest and her duty to forget
it. But the storm was about to burst even more speedily than he
apprehended. Lady Bellamer little suspected that her conduct was watched
with all the malice of jealousy, and all the eagerness of interest. She
little suspected that her confidential servant was the spy of her
injured husband, bound to fidelity in this task by ties as disgraceful
as they were strong, and that this woman waited only for legal proof of
her mistress's guilt, to lay the particulars before her lord. That proof
was now obtained; and Lord Bellamer hastened to avail himself of it. He
arrived in London on the morning of the last day of Montreville's life;
and, charging his guilty wife with her perfidy, expelled her from his
house.

She flew to Hargrave's lodgings, and found him preparing for his daily
visit to Laura. Though provoked at being delayed, he was obliged to stay
and listen to her, while she hastily related the events of the morning.
She was about to speak of her conviction, that, by making her his wife,
he would shield her from the world's scorn, and that he would not, by
any legal defence, retard her emancipation. But Hargrave suffered her
not to proceed. He perceived that his adventure must now be public. It
must immediately find its way into the public prints; and in a few hours
it might be in the hands of Laura. He bitterly upbraided Lady Bellamer
with her want of caution in the concealment of their amour; cursed her
folly as the ruin of all his dearest hopes; and, in the frenzy of his
rage, scrupled not to reveal the cutting secret, that while another was
the true object of his affections, Lady Bellamer had sacrificed her all
to an inclination as transient as it was vile. The wretched creature,
terrified at his rage, weakened by her situation, overcome by the events
of the morning, and stung by a reception so opposite to her
expectations, sunk at his feet in violent hysterics. But Hargrave could
at that moment feel for no miseries but his own; and consigning her to
the care of the woman of the house, he was again about to hasten to
Montreville's, when he was told that a gentleman wished to speak with
him upon particular business.

This person was the bearer of a note from Lord Bellamer, importing that
he desired to meet Colonel Hargrave on that or the following day, at any
hour and place which the Colonel might appoint. After the injuries given
and received, their meeting, he said, could have but one object.
Hargrave, in no humour to delay, instantly replied that in three hours
he should be found in a solitary field, which he named, at a few miles
distant from town, and that he should bring with him a friend and a
brace of pistols. He then went in search of this friend, and finding him
at home, the business was speedily settled.

Nothing, in the slight consideration of death which Hargrave suffered to
enter his mind, gave him so much disturbance as the thought that he
might, if he fell, leave Laura to the possession of another. He
willingly persuaded himself that she had an attachment to him too
romantic to be transferable. But she was poor; she might in time make a
marriage of esteem and convenience; and Laura, the virtuous Laura, would
certainly love her husband, and the father of her children. The bare
idea stung like a scorpion, and Hargrave hastened to his man of
business, where he spent the time which yet remained before the hour of
his appointment, in dictating a bequest of five thousand pounds to Laura
Montreville; but true to his purpose, he added a clause, by which, in
case of her marriage, she forfeited the whole.

He then repaired to meet Lord Bellamer; and, the ground being taken,
Hargrave's first ball penetrated Lord Bellamer's left shoulder, who then
fired without effect, and instantly fell. Hargrave, whose humanity had
returned with his temper, accompanied his wounded antagonist to a
neighbouring cottage to which he was conveyed, anxiously procured for
him every possible comfort, and heard with real joy, that if he could be
kept from fever, his wound was not likely to be mortal. The gentleman
who had been Hargrave's second, offered to remain near Lord Bellamer, in
order to give warning to his friend should any danger occur; and it was
late in the evening before Hargrave, alone and comfortless, returned to
town.

Never had his own thoughts been such vexatious companions. To his own
scared conscience his crimes might have seemed trivial; but when he
placed them before him in the light in which he knew that they would be
viewed by Laura, their nature seemed changed. He knew that she would
find no plea in the custom of the times, for endangering the life of a
fellow-creature, and that her moral vocabulary contained no qualifying
epithet to palliate the foulness of adultery. The next day would give
publicity to his duel and its cause; and should the report reach Laura's
ear, what could he hope from her favour? The bribes of love and ambition
he had found too poor to purchase her sanction to the bare intention of
a crime. Even the intention seemed forgiven only in the hope of luring
him to the paths of virtue: and when she should know the failure of that
hope, would not her forgiveness be withdrawn?

But Laura, thus on the point of being lost, was more dear to him than
ever; and often did he wish that he had fallen by Lord Bellamer's hand,
rather than that he should live to see himself the object of her
indifference, perhaps aversion. Time still remained, however, by one
desperate effort to hurry or terrify her into immediate compliance with
his wishes; and, half-distracted with the emotions of remorse, and love,
and hope, and fear, he ordered his carriage to Montreville's house. Here
passed the scene which has been already described. Hargrave was too much
agitated to attend to the best methods of persuasion, and he quitted
Laura in the full conviction that she would never be his wife. He threw
himself into his carriage, and was driven home, now frantickly bewailing
his loss, now vowing, that rather than endure it, he would incur the
penalties of every law, divine and human. All night he paced his
apartment, uttering imprecations on his own folly, and forming plans for
regaining by fraud, force, or persuasion, his lost rights over Laura. At
last his vehemence having somewhat spent itself, he threw himself on a
couch, and sunk into feverish and interrupted sleep.

It was not till next morning, that he thought of inquiring after the
unfortunate partner of his iniquity; and was told that, too ill to be
removed, she had been carried to bed in the house, where she still
remained.

Intending to renew the attempt of the preceding night, he again repaired
to Laura's house; but his intention was frustrated by the death of
Montreville. On receiving the information, he was at first a good deal
shocked at the sudden departure of a man, whom, a few hours before, he
had left in no apparent danger. But that feeling was effaced when once
he began to consider the event as favourable to his designs upon Laura.
Left to solitude, to poverty, perhaps to actual want, what resource had
she so eligible as the acceptance of offers splendid and disinterested
like his. And he would urge her acceptance of them with all the ardour
of passion. He would alarm her with the prospects of desolateness and
dependence, he would appeal to the wishes of her dead father. Such
pleadings must, he thought, have weight with her; and again the hopes of
victory revived in his mind. Should the principle, to which she so
firmly adhered, outweigh all these considerations, he thought she would
forfeit by her obstinacy all claim to his forbearance, and his heart
fluttered at the idea that she had now no protector from his power. He
resolved to haunt, to watch her, to lose no opportunity of pressing his
suit. Wherever she went he was determined to follow; 'and surely,'
thought he, 'she must have some moments of weakness, she cannot be
always on her guard.'

For some days he continued to make regular visits at her lodgings,
though he had no hope of seeing her till after Montreville was consigned
to the dust; and he rejoiced that the customary seclusion was likely to
retard her knowledge of his misconduct. To make inquiries after the
health and spirits of Laura, was the ostensible, but not the only motive
of his visits. He wished to discover all that was known to the people of
the house of her present situation and future plans. On the latter
subject they could not afford him even the slightest information, for
Laura had never dropped a hint of her intentions. But he received such
accounts of her pecuniary distresses, and of the manner in which she
supported them, as at once increased his reverence for her character,
and his hopes that she would take refuge from her wants in the affluence
which he offered her.

From Fanny, who officiated as porter, and who almost adored Laura, he
received most of his intelligence; and while he listened to instances of
the fortitude, the piety, the tenderness, the resignation of his
beloved, a love of virtue, sincere though transient, would cross his
soul; he would look back with abhorrence on a crime which had hazarded
the loss of such a treasure; and vow, that, were he once possessed of
Laura, his life should be a copy of her worth. But Hargrave's vows
deceived him; for he loved the virtues only that were associated with an
object of pleasure, he abhorred the vices only which threatened him with
pain.

On the day succeeding the funeral, he ventured on an attempt to see
Laura, and sent her a message, begging permission to wait upon her; but
was answered that she received no visitors. He then wrote to her a
letter full of the sentiments which she inspired. He expressed his
sympathy with her misfortunes, and fervently besought her to accept of a
protector who would outdo in tenderness the one she had lost. He
implored her to add the strongest incentive to the course of virtue, in
which, if she would listen to his request, he solemnly promised to
persevere. He again insinuated that she must speedily decide; that, if
her decision were unfavourable, he might be driven to seek forgetfulness
amidst ruinous dissipation; and he adjured her, by the wishes of her
dead father, a claim which he thought would with her be irresistible, to
consent to dispense with his further probation. He said he would visit
her late in the following forenoon, in the hope of receiving his answer
from her own lips; and concluded by telling her that, lest the late
unfortunate event had occasioned her any temporary difficulties, he
begged to be considered as her banker, and enclosed a bill for a hundred
pounds.

He gave this letter to Fanny, with injunctions to deliver it
immediately, and then went to inquire for Lord Bellamer, whom it gave
him real pleasure to find pronounced out of danger. Lady Bellamer, too,
had ceased to reproach and molest him. She had recovered from her
indisposition, and removed to the house of a relation, who humanely
offered to receive her. His hopes were strong of the effect of his
letter; and he passed the evening in greater comfort than had lately
fallen to his share. Often did he repeat to himself that Laura must
accede to his proposals. What other course could she pursue--Would her
spirit allow her to become a burden on the scanty income of her friend
Mrs Douglas--Would she venture to pursue, as a profession, the art in
which she so greatly excelled--Would she return to live alone at
Glenalbert? This last appeared the most probable to Hargrave, because
the most desirable. Alone, without any companion whose frozen counsel
could counteract the softness of her heart, in a romantic solitude,
watched, as he would watch, importuned as he would importune her,
strange if no advantage could be wrested from her affection or her
prudence, her interest or her fears! To possess Laura was the first wish
of his soul; and he was not very fastidious as to the means of its
gratification; for even the love of a libertine is selfish. He was
perfectly sincere in his honourable proposals to Laura. He might have
been less so had any others possessed a chance of success.

He rose early the next morning, and impatiently looked for the hour
which he had appointed for his visit. He wished that he had fixed on an
earlier one, took up a book to beguile the minutes, threw it down again,
looked a hundred times at his watch, ordered his carriage to the door
two hours before it was wanted, feared to go too soon, lest Laura should
refuse to see him, and yet was at her lodgings, long before his
appointment. He inquired for her, and was answered that she had
discharged her lodgings, and was gone. 'Gone! Whither?'--Fanny did not
know; Miss Montreville had been busy all the evening before in preparing
for her removal, and had left the house early that morning. 'And did she
leave no address where she might be found?' 'I heard her tell the
coachman,' said Fanny, 'to stop at the end of Grosvenor-street, and she
would direct him where she chose to be set down. But I believe she has
left a letter for you, Sir.' 'Fool!' cried Hargrave, 'why did you not
tell me so sooner--give it me instantly.'

He impatiently followed the girl to the parlour which had been
Montreville's. The letter lay on the table. He snatched it, and hastily
tore it open. It contained only his bill, returned with Miss
Montreville's compliments and thanks. He twisted the card into atoms,
and cursed with all his soul the ingratitude and cold prudence of the
writer. He swore that if she were on earth, he would find her; and vowed
that he would make her repent of the vexation which he said she had
always taken a savage delight in heaping upon him.

Restless, and yet unwilling to be gone, he next wandered into Laura's
painting-room, as if hoping in her once-favourite haunt to find traces
of her flight. He had never entered it since the day when the discovery
of De Courcy's portrait had roused his sudden frenzy. Association
brought back the same train of thought. He imagined that Laura, while
she concealed herself from him, had taken refuge with the De Courcys;
and all his jealousy returned. After, according to custom, acting the
madman for a while, he began as usual to recover his senses. He knew he
could easily discover whether Miss Montreville was at Norwood, by
writing to a friend who lived in the neighbourhood; and he was going
home to execute this design, when, passing through the lobby, he was met
by the landlady. He stopped to renew his inquiries whether any thing was
known, or guessed, of Laura's retreat. But Mrs Stubbs could give him no
more information on that subject than her maid, and she was infinitely
more surprised at his question than Fanny had been; for having made
certain observations which convinced her that Hargrave's visits were in
the character of a lover, she had charitably concluded, and actually
asserted, that Laura had accepted of his protection.

Hargrave next inquired whether Laura had any visitors but himself? 'No
living creature,' was the reply. 'Could Mrs Stubbs conjecture whither
she was gone?' 'None in the world,' answered Mrs Stubbs; 'only this I
know, it can't be very far off--for to my certain knowledge, she had
only seven shillings in her pocket, and that could not carry her far, as
I told the gentleman who was here this morning.' 'What gentleman?' cried
Hargrave. 'One Mr De Courcy, Sir, that used to call for her; but he has
not been here these six weeks before; and he seemed quite astounded as
well as yourself, Sir.' Hargrave then questioned her so closely
concerning De Courcy's words and looks, as to convince himself that his
rival was entirely ignorant of the motions of the fugitive. In this
belief he returned home, uncertain what measures he should pursue, but
determined not to rest till he had found Laura.

When De Courcy quitted Laura, he had no intention of seeing her again
till circumstances should enable him to offer her his hand. No sacrifice
could have cost him more pain; but justice and filial duty did not
permit him to hesitate. Neither did he think himself entitled to sadden
with a face of care his domestic circle, nor to make his mother and
sister pay dear for their comforts, by shewing that they were purchased
at the expence of his peace. Nor did he languidly resign to idle
love-dreams the hours which an immortal spirit claimed for its
improvement, and which the social tie bound him to enliven and cheer.
But to appear what he was not, to introduce constraint and dissimulation
into the sacred privacies of home, never occurred to De Courcy. He
therefore strove not to _seem_ cheerful but to _be_ so. He returned to
his former studies, and even prosecuted them with alacrity, for he knew
that Laura respected a cultivated mind. His faults, he was if possible
more than ever studious to correct, for Laura loved virtue. And when
occasion for a kind considerate or self-denying action presented itself,
he eagerly seized it, saying in his heart, 'this is like Laura.'

Sometimes the fear that he might be forgotten, forced from him the
bitterest sigh that he had ever breathed; but he endeavoured to comfort
himself with the belief that she would soon be screened from the gaze of
admiration, and that her regard for him, though yet in its infancy,
would be sufficient to secure her from other impressions. Of the reality
of this regard he did not allow himself to doubt, or if he hesitated for
a moment, he called to mind the picture, Laura's concealment of it, her
confusion at his attempt to examine it, and he no longer doubted.

The arrival of the picture itself might have explained all that related
to it, had De Courcy chosen to have it so explained. But he turned his
eye from the unpleasing sight, and sheltered his hopes by a hundred
treasured instances of love which had scarcely any existence but in his
fancy.

His efforts to be cheerful were however less successful, after Laura, in
a few melancholy lines, informed Miss De Courcy that Montreville's
increased illness made their return to Scotland more uncertain than
ever. He imagined his dear Laura the solitary attendant of a sickbed; no
kind voice to comfort, no friendly face to cheer her; perhaps in
poverty, that poverty increased too by the artifice which he had used to
lessen it. He grew anxious, comfortless, and at length really miserable.
Every day the arrival of the letters was looked for with extreme
solicitude in hope of more cheering news; but every day brought
disappointment, for Laura wrote no more. His mother shared in his
anxiety, and increased it by expressing her own. She feared that Miss
Montreville was ill, and unable to write; and the image of Laura among
strangers, sick and in poverty, obliterated Montague's prudent
resolutions of trusting himself no more in the presence of his beloved.
He set out for London, and arrived at the door of Laura's lodgings about
an hour after she had quitted them.

Mrs Stubbs, of whom he made personal inquiries, was abundantly
communicative. She gave him, as far as it was known to her, a full
history of Laura's adventures since he had seen her; and, where she was
deficient in facts, supplied the blank by conjecture. With emotion
indescribable, he listened to a coarse account of Miss Montreville's
wants and labours. 'How could you suffer all this?' cried he,
indignantly, when he was able to speak. 'Times are hard, Sir,' returned
Mrs Stubbs, the jolly purple deepening in her cheeks. 'Besides, Miss
Montreville had always such an air with her, that I could not for my
very heart have asked her to take pot-luck with us.'

The colour faded from De Courcy's face as Mrs Stubbs proceeded to relate
the constant visits of Hargrave. 'I'll warrant,' said she, growing
familiar as she perceived that she excited interest, 'I'll warrant he
did not come here so often for nothing. People must have ears, and use
them too; and I heard him myself swearing to her one day, that he loved
her better than his life, or something to that purpose; and that, if she
would live with him, he would make her dreams pleasant, or some such
stuff as that; and now, as sure as can be, she has taken him at his
word, and gone to him.'

'Peace, woman!' cried De Courcy, in a tone which he had never used to
any of the sex, 'how dare you--?'

Mrs Stubbs, who had all that want of nerve which characterizes vulgar
arrogance, instantly shrunk into her shell. 'No offence, Sir,' said she.
'It's all mere guess-work with me; only she does not know a creature in
London, and she had nothing to carry her out of it; for she had just
seven shillings in her pocket. I gave her seventeen and sixpence of
change this morning, and she gave half-a-guinea of that to the
kitchen-maid. Now it stands to reason, she would not have been so ready
parting with her money if she had not known where more was to be had.'

De Courcy, shocked and disgusted, turned from her in displeasure; and
finding that nothing was to be learnt from her of the place of Laura's
retreat, betook himself to the print-shop, where he remembered that he
had first procured Miss Montreville's address. Mr Wilkins declared his
ignorance on the subject of Montague's inquiries; but, seeing the look
of disappointment with which De Courcy was leaving the shop,
good-naturedly said, 'I dare say, Sir, if you wish to find out where
Miss Montreville lives, I could let you know by asking Colonel Hargrave.
He comes here sometimes to look at the caricatures. And,' added Mr
Wilkins, winking significantly, 'I am mistaken if they are not very well
acquainted.'

De Courcy's heart rose to his mouth. 'Perhaps so,' said he, scarcely
conscious of what he said. 'There was a famous scene between them here
about three weeks ago,' proceeded the print-seller, anxious to justify
his own sagacity. 'I suppose they had not met for a while, and there
such a kissing and embracing'--''Tis false!' cried De Courcy, lightning
flashing from his eyes, 'Miss Montreville would have brooked such
indignities from no man on earth.' 'Nay,' said Wilkins, shrugging up his
shoulders, 'the shop-lads saw it as well as I--she fainted away in his
arms, and he carried her into the back-room there, and would not suffer
one of us to come near her; and Mr Finch there saw him down on his knees
to her.' 'Cease your vile slanders,' cried De Courcy, half-distracted
with grief and indignation, 'I abhor--I despise them. But at your peril
dare to breathe them into any other ear.' So saying, he darted from the
shop, and returned to his hotel, infinitely more wretched than ever he
had been.

The happy dream was dispelled that painted him the master of Laura's
affections. Another possessed her love; and how visible, how
indelicately glaring, must be the preference that was apparent to every
vulgar eye! But, bitter as was his disappointment, and cruel the pangs
of jealousy, they were ease compared to the torture with which he
admitted a thought derogatory to Laura's worth. A thousand times he
reproached himself for suffering the hints and conjectures of a lowbred
woman to affect his mind;--a thousand times assured himself, that no
poverty, no difficulties, would overpower the integrity of Laura. 'Yet
Hargrave is a libertine,' said he, 'and if she can love a libertine,
how have I been deceived in her! No! it cannot be!--She is all
truth--all purity. It is she that is deceived. He has imposed upon her
by a false show of virtue, and misery awaits her detection of his
deceit. She gone to him! I will never believe it. Libertine as he is, he
dared not but to think of it. Extremity of want--lingering famine would
not degrade her to this,'--and tears filled De Courcy's manly eyes at
the thought that Laura was indeed in want.

He had no direct means of supplying her necessities; but he hoped that
she might inquire at her former abode for any letters that might chance
to be left for her, and that she might thus receive any packet which he
addressed to her. 'She shall never be humbled,' said he with a heavy
sigh, 'by knowing that she owes this trifle to an indifferent, forgotten
stranger;' and inclosing fifty pounds in a blank cover, he put both into
an envelope to Mrs Stubbs, in which he informed her, that if she could
find no means of conveying the packet to Miss Montreville, the anonymous
writer would claim it again at some future time, on describing its
contents.

Before dispatching the letter, however, he resolved on making an attempt
to discover whether Hargrave was acquainted with Laura's retreat. He
shrunk from meeting his rival. His blood ran cold as he pictured to his
fancy the exulting voice, the triumphant glance which would announce the
master of Laura's fate. But any thing was preferable to his present
suspense; and the hope that he might yet be useful to Laura, formed an
incitement still more powerful. 'Let me but find her,' said he, 'and I
will yet wrest her from destruction. If she is deceived I will warn; if
she is oppressed, I will protect her.'

He imagined that he should probably find Hargrave at the house of his
uncle Lord Lincourt, and hastened thither to seek him; but found the
house occupied only by servants, who were ignorant of the Colonel's
address. De Courcy knew none of Hargrave's places of resort. The habits
and acquaintance of each lay in a different line. No means therefore of
discovering him occurred to Montague, except that of inquiring at the
house of Mrs Stubbs, where he thought it probable that the place of
Hargrave's residence might be known. Thither, then, he next bent his
course.

The door was opened to him by Fanny; who replied to his questions, that
none of the family knew where Colonel Hargrave lived, and lamented that
De Courcy had not come a little earlier, saying that the Colonel had
been gone not above a quarter of an hour. De Courcy was turning
disappointed away; when Fanny, stopping him, said with a courtesy and a
half-whisper, 'Sir, an't please you, my mistress was all wrong about
Miss Montreville, for the Colonel knows no more about her than I do.'
'Indeed!' said De Courcy, all attention. 'Yes indeed Sir--when I told
him she was away, he was quite amazed, and in such a passion! So then I
thought I would give him the letter.--' 'What letter?' cried De Courcy,
the glow of animation fading in his face. 'A letter that Miss
Montreville left for him, Sir, but when he got it he was ten times
angrier than before, and swore at her for not letting him know where she
was going. So I thought, Sir, I would make bold to tell you, Sir, as
Mistress had been speaking her mind, Sir; for it's a sad thing to have
one's character taken away; and Miss Montreville, I am sure, wouldn't do
hurt to nobody.'

'You are a good girl, a very good girl,' said De Courcy, giving her,
with a guinea, a very hearty squeeze of the hand. He made her repeat the
particulars of Hargrave's violent behaviour; and satisfied from them
that his rival had no share in Laura's disappearance, he returned to his
hotel, his heart lightened of half the heaviest load that ever it had
borne.

Still, however, enough remained to exclude for a time all quiet from his
breast. He could not doubt that Laura's affections were Hargrave's. She
had given proof of it palpable to the most common observer; and
resentment mingled with his grief while he thought, that to his fervent
respectful love, she preferred the undistinguishing passion of a
libertine. 'All women are alike,' said he, 'the slaves of mere outward
show:'--An observation for which the world was probably first indebted
to circumstances somewhat like De Courcy's.

Restless and uncomfortable, without any hope of finding Laura, he would
now have left London without an hour's delay. But, though he forgot his
own fatigues, he was not unmindful of those of the grey-haired domestic
who attended him. He therefore deferred his journey to the following
morning; and then set out on his return to Norwood, more depressed and
wretched than he had quitted it.




CHAPTER XIX


All was yet dark and still, when Laura, like some unearthly being, stood
by the bed where Fanny slept. The light which she bore in her wasted
hand, shewed faintly the majestic form, darkened by its mourning
garments; and shed a dreary gleam upon tearless eyes, and a face whence
all the hues of life were fled. She made a sign for Fanny to rise; and,
awe-struck by the calm of unutterable grief, Fanny arose, and in silence
followed her. They entered the chamber of death. With noiseless steps
Laura approached the body, and softly drew back the covering. She
beckoned Fanny towards her. The girl comprehended that her aid was
wanted in performing the last duties to Montreville; and, shrinking with
superstitious fear, said, in a low tremulous whisper, 'I dare not touch
the dead.' Laura answered not; but raising her eyes to Heaven, as if
there to seek assistance in her mournful task, she gently pressed her
hand upon the half-closed eyes that had so often beamed fondness on her.
Unaided, and in silence, she did the last offices of love. She shed no
tears. She uttered no lamentation. The dread stillness was broken only
by the groans that burst at times from her heavy heart, and the more
continued sobs of her attendant, who vented in tears her fear, her pity,
and her admiration.

When the sad task was finished, Laura, still speechless, motioned to the
servant to retire. In horror at the thoughts of leaving Laura alone with
the dead, yet fearing to raise her voice, the girl respectfully grasped
her mistress's gown, and, in a low but earnest whisper, besought her to
leave this dismal place, and to go to her own chamber. Scarcely sensible
of her meaning, Laura suffered her to draw her away; but when the door
closed upon all that remained of her father, she shuddered convulsively,
and struggled to return. Fanny, however, gathered courage to lead her
to her own apartment. There she threw herself prostrate on the ground; a
flood of tears came to relieve her oppressed heart, and her recovered
utterance broke forth in an act of resignation. She continued for some
hours to give vent to her sorrow--a sorrow unallayed by any less painful
feeling, save those of devotion. She had lost the affectionate guide of
her youth, the fond parent, whose love for her had brought him untimely
to the grave; and, in the anguish of the thought that she should watch
his smile and hear his voice no more, she scarcely remembered that he
had left her to want and loneliness.

The morning was far advanced, when her sorrows were broken in upon by
her landlady, who came to ask her directions in regard to the funeral.
Laura had been unable to bend her thoughts to the consideration of this
subject; and she answered only by her tears. In vain did Mrs Stubbs
repeat that 'it was folly to take on so,'--'that we must all die;' 'and
that as every thing has two handles, Laura might comfort herself that
she should now have but one mouth to feed.' Laura seemed obstinate in
her grief, and at last Mrs Stubbs declared that whether she would hear
reason or not, something must without delay be settled about the
funeral; as for her part she could not order things without knowing how
they were to be paid for. Laura, putting her hand to her forehead,
complained that her head felt confused, and, mildly begging her
persecutor to have a little patience with her, promised, if she might be
left alone for the present, to return to the conversation in half an
hour.

Accordingly, soon after the time appointed, the landlady was surprised
to see Laura enter the parlour, her cheek indeed colourless and her eyes
swelled with weeping, but her manner perfectly calm and collected. 'Here
are my father's watch and seals,' said she, presenting them. 'They may
be disposed of. That cannot wound him now,'--and she turned away her
head, and drew her hand across her eyes. 'Have the goodness to order
what is necessary, for I am a stranger, without any friend.' Mrs Stubbs,
examining the watch, declared her opinion that the sale of it would
produce very little. 'Let every thing be plain, but decent,' said Laura,
'and when I am able I will work day and night till all is paid.' 'I
doubt, Miss,' answered Mrs Stubbs, 'it will be long before your work
will pay for much; besides you will be in my debt for a week's
lodgings--we always charge a week extra when there is a death in the
house.' 'Tell me what you would have me to do, and I will do it,' said
the unfortunate Laura, wholly unable to contend with her hard-hearted
companion. 'Why, Miss,' said Mrs Stubbs, 'there is your beautiful
rose-wood work-table and the foot-stools, and your fine ivory work-box
that Mr De Courcy sent here before you came; if you choose to dispose of
them, I will take them off your hands.' 'Take them,' said Laura, 'I knew
not that they were mine.' Mrs Stubbs then conscientiously offered to
give a fourth part of the sum which these toys had cost De Courcy three
months before, an offer which Laura instantly accepted; and the landlady
having settled this business much to her own satisfaction, cheerfully
undertook to arrange the obsequies of poor Montreville.

Though the tragical scenes of the night had left Laura no leisure to
dwell upon her fears for Hargrave, it was not without thankfulness that
she heard of his safety and restored composure. Her mind was at first
too much occupied by her recent loss, to attempt accounting for his
extravagant behaviour; and, after the first paroxysms of her sorrow were
past, she retained but an imperfect recollection of his late
conversation with her. She merely remembered his seeming distraction and
threatened suicide; and only bewildered herself by her endeavours to
unravel his mysterious conduct. Sometimes a suspicion not very remote
from truth would dart into her mind; but she quickly banished it, as an
instance of the causeless fears that are apt to infest the hearts of the
unfortunate.

An innate delicacy which, in some degree, supplied to Laura the want of
experience, made her feel an impropriety in the daily visits which she
was informed that Hargrave made at her lodgings. She was aware that they
might be liable to misrepresentation, even though she should persist in
her refusal to see him; and this consideration appeared to add to the
necessity already so urgent, for resolving on some immediate plan for
her future course of life. But the future offered to Laura no attractive
prospect. Wherever she turned, all seemed dark and unpromising. She
feared not to labour for her subsistence; no narrow pride forbade her
use of any honourable means of independence. But her personal charms
were such as no degree of humility could screen from the knowledge of
their possessor, and she was sensible how much this dangerous
distinction increased the disqualifications of her sex and age for the
character of an artist. As an artist, she must be exposed to the
intrusion of strangers, to public observation if successful; to unpitied
neglect if she failed in her attempt. Besides, it was impossible to
think of living alone and unprotected, in the human chaos that
surrounded her. All her father's dismal forebodings rose to her
remembrance; and she almost regarded herself as one who would be noticed
only as a mark for destruction, beguiled by frauds which no vigilance
could detect, overwhelmed by power which she could neither resist nor
escape.

Should she seek in solitude a refuge from the destroyer, and return to
mourn at her deserted Glenalbert, the stroke that had left it like her
lonely and forlorn, want lurked amidst its shades; for with her father
had died not only the duties and the joys of life, but even the means of
its support. Her temporary right to the few acres which Montreville
farmed, was in less than a year to expire; and she knew that, after
discharging the claim of the landlord, together with some debts which
the long illness of Lady Harriet and the ill-fated journey had obliged
Montreville to contract, little would remain from the sale of her
effects at Glenalbert.

Laura was sure, that the benevolent friend of her youth, the excellent
Mrs Douglas, would receive her with open arms--guide her inexperience
with a mother's counsel--comfort her sorrows with a mother's love. But
her spirit revolted from a life of indolent dependence, and her sense of
justice from casting a useless burden upon an income too confined to
answer claims stronger and more natural than hers. Mrs Douglas was
herself the preceptress of her children, and both by nature and
education amply qualified for the momentous task. In domestic
management, her skill and activity were unrivalled. Laura, therefore,
saw no possibility of repaying, by her usefulness in any department of
the family, the protection which she might receive; and she determined
that nothing but the last necessity should induce her to tax the
generosity of her friend, or to forego the honourable independence of
those who, though 'silver or gold they have none,' can barter for the
comforts they enjoy their mental treasures or their bodily toil.

To undertake the tuition of youth occurred to her as the most eligible
means of procuring necessary subsistence, and protection, more necessary
still. It appeared to her that, as a member of any reputable family, she
should be sheltered from the dangers which her father had most taught
her to dread. She reviewed her accomplishments, and impartially examined
her ability to communicate them with temper and perseverance. Though for
the most part attained with great accuracy, they were few in number, and
unobtrusive in kind. She read aloud with uncommon harmony and grace. She
spoke and wrote with fluency and precision. She was grammatically
acquainted with the French and Latin languages, and an adept in the
common rules of arithmetic. Her proficiency in painting has been already
noticed; and she sang with inimitable sweetness and expression.

But though expert in every description of plain needle-work, she was an
utter novice in the manufacture of all those elegant nothings, which are
so serviceable to fine ladies in their warfare against time. Though she
moved with unstudied dignity and peerless grace, we are obliged to
confess, that the seclusion of her native village had doomed her to
ignorance of the art of dancing, that she had never entered a ball-room
less capacious than the horizon, nor performed with a partner more
illustrious than the schoolmaster's daughter. Her knowledge of music,
too, was extremely limited. Lady Harriet had indeed tried to teach her
to play on the piano-forte; but the attempt, after costing Laura many a
full heart, and many a watery eye, was relinquished as vain. Though the
child learnt with unusual facility whatever was taught her by her father
or Mrs Douglas, and though she was already remarkable for the sweetness
with which she warbled her woodnotes wild, she no sooner approached the
piano-forte, than an invincible stupidity seemed to seize on all her
faculties. This was the more mortifying, as it was the only one of her
ladyship's accomplishments which she ever personally attempted to
communicate to her daughter. Lady Harriet was astonished at her failure.
It could proceed, she thought, from nothing but obstinacy. But the
appropriate remedy for obstinacy, only aggravated the symptoms, and,
after all, Laura was indebted to Colonel Hargrave's tuition for so much
skill as enabled her to accompany her own singing.

Laura had more than once felt her deficiency in these fashionable arts,
on seeing them exhibited by young ladies, who, to use their own
expression, had returned from _finishing themselves_ at a
boarding-school, and she feared that this blank in her education might
prove a fatal bar to her being employed as a governess. But another and
a greater obstacle lay before her--she was utterly unknown. The only
patrons whose recommendation she could command, were distant and
obscure; and what mother would trust the minds and the manners of her
children to the formation of a stranger? She knew not the ostrich-like
daring of fashionable mothers. This latter objection seemed equally
hostile to her being received in quality of companion by those who might
be inclined to exchange subsistence and protection for relief from
solitude; and Laura, almost despairing, knew not whither to turn her
eye.

One path indeed invited her steps, a path bright with visions of
rapture, warm with the sunshine of love and pleasure; but the flaming
sword of Heaven guarded the entrance; and as often as her thoughts
reverted that way, the struggle was renewed which forces the choice from
the pleasing to the right. No frequency of return rendered this struggle
less painful. Laura's prudence had slept, when a little vigilance might
have saved her many an after pang; and she had long paid, was still long
to pay, the forfeit of neglecting that wisdom which would guard 'with
all diligence' the first beginnings of even the most innocent passions.
Had she curbed the infant-strength of an attachment which, though it
failed to warp her integrity, had so deeply wounded her peace, how had
she lessened the force of that temptation, which lured her from the
rugged ascent, where want and difficulty were to be her companions;
which enticed her to the flowery bowers of pleasure with the voice and
with the smile of Hargrave!

Yet Laura had resisted a bribe more powerful than any consideration
merely selfish could supply; and she blushed to harbour a thought of
yielding to her own inclinations what she had refused to a parent's
wants, to a parent's prayer. Her heart filled as she called to mind how
warmly Montreville had seconded the wishes of her lover, how resolutely
she had withstood his will; and it swelled even to bursting at the
thought that the vow was now fatally made void, which promised, by every
endearment of filial love, to atone for this first act of disobedience.
'Dearest, kindest of friends,' she cried, 'I was inflexible to thy
request--thy last request! and shall I now recede? now, when, perhaps,
thou art permitted to behold and to approve my motive; perhaps permitted
to watch me still--permitted with higher power to guard, with less
erring wisdom to direct me! And, Thou, who, in matchless condescension,
refusest not to be called Father of the fatherless--Thou, who, in every
difficulty canst guide, from every danger canst protect thy children,
let, if Thou see it good, the Heavens, which are thy throne, be all my
covering, the earth, which is thy footstool, be all my bed; but suffer
me not to wander from Thee, the only source of peace and joy, to seek
them in fountains unhallowed and forbidden.'

Religious habits and sentiments were permanent inmates of Laura's
breast. They had been invited and cherished, till, like familiar
friends, they came unsolicited; and, like friends, too, their visits
were most frequent in adversity. But the more ardent emotions of piety,
are, alas! transient guests with us all; and, sinking from the flight
which raised her for a time above the sorrows and the wants of earth,
Laura was again forced to shrink from the gaunt aspect of poverty, again
to turn a wistful eye towards a haven of rest on this side the grave.

Young as she was, however, she had long been a vigilant observer of her
own actions, and of their consequences; and the result was an immutable
conviction, that no heartfelt comfort could, in any circumstances,
harbour with wilful transgression. As wilful transgression, she
considered her marriage with a man whose principles she had fatal reason
to distrust. As a rash defiance of unknown danger; as a desperate daring
of temptations whose force was yet untried, as a desertion of those arms
by which alone she could hope for victory in her Christian combat, Laura
considered the hazardous enterprize which, trusting to the reformation
of a libertine, would expose her to his example and his authority, his
provocations and his associates. Again she solemnly renewed her
resolution never, by wilfully braving temptation, to forego the
protection of Him who can dash the fulness of worldly prosperity with
secret bitterness, or gladden with joys unspeakable the dwelling visited
by no friend but Him, cheered by no comfort save the light of his
countenance.

Hargrave's letter served rather to fortify the resolution which it was
intended to shake; for Laura was not insensible to the indelicacy which
did not scorn to owe to her necessities a consent which he had in vain
tried to extort from her affection. Though pleased with his liberality,
she was hurt by his supposing that she could have so far forgotten the
mortal offence which he had offered her, as to become his debtor for any
pecuniary favour; and, as nothing could be further from her intention
than to owe any obligation to Colonel Hargrave, she did not hesitate a
moment to return the money. When she had sealed the card in which she
inclosed it, she again returned to the contemplation of her dreary
prospects; and half hopelessly examined the possibilities of
subsistence. To offer instruction to the young, or amusement to the old,
in exchange for an asylum from want and danger, still appeared to her
the most eligible plan of life; and again she weighed the difficulty of
procuring the necessary recommendations.

Lady Pelham occurred to her. Some claim she thought she might have had
to the patronage of so near a relation. But who should identify her? who
should satisfy Lady Pelham that the claim of relationship did indeed
belong to Laura? Had she been previously known to her aunt, her
difficulties would have been at an end; now she would probably be
rejected as an impostor; and she gave a sigh to the want of foresight
which had suffered her to rejoice in escaping an interview with Lady
Pelham.

After much consideration, she determined to solicit the recommendations
of Mrs Douglas and the De Courcy family; and, until she could avail
herself of these, to subsist, in some obscure lodging, by the labour of
her hands. In the meantime, it was necessary to remove immediately from
her present abode. The day following was the last when she could claim
any right to remain there; and she proceeded to make preparations for
her departure.

With a bleeding heart she began to arrange whatever had belonged to
Montreville; and paused, with floods of tears, upon every relic now
become so sacred. She entered his closet. His was the last foot that had
pressed the threshold. His chair stood as he had risen from it. On the
ground lay the cushion yet impressed with his knees--his Bible was open
as he had left it. One passage was blistered with his tears; and there
Laura read with emotions unutterable--'Leave to me thy fatherless
children, and I will preserve them alive.' Her recent wounds thus torn
open, with agony which could not be restrained, she threw herself upon
the ground; and, with cries of anguish, besought her father to return
but for one short hour to comfort his desolate child. 'Oh I shall never,
never see him more,' said she,--'all my cries are vain,'--and she wept
the more because they were in vain. Soon, however, she reproached
herself with her immoderate sorrow, soon mingled its accents with those
of humble resignation; and the vigorous mind recovering in devotion all
its virtuous energy, she returned, with restored composure, to her
melancholy labours.

In her father's writing desk she found an unfinished letter. It began
'My dear De Courcy,'--and Laura was going to read it with the awe of one
who listens to the last words of a father, when she remembered having
surprised her father while writing it, and his having hastily concealed
it from her sight. She instantly folded it without further acquaintance
with its contents, except that her own name caught her eye. Continuing
to arrange the papers, she observed a letter addressed to herself in a
hand which she did not remember to have seen. It was Lady Pelham's
answer to that in which Laura had announced her mother's death. She
perceived that it might furnish an introduction to her aunt; and with a
sensation of gratitude she remembered that she had been accidentally
prevented from destroying it.

Lady Pelham was elder by several years than her sister Lady Harriet. Her
father, a saving painstaking attorney, died a few months after she was
born. His widow, who, from an idea of their necessity, had concurred in
all his economical plans, discovered with equal surprise and delight,
that his death had left her the entire management of five-and-forty
thousand pounds. This fortune, which she was to enjoy during her life,
was secured, in the event of her demise, to little Miss Bridget; and
this arrangement was one of the earliest pieces of information which
little Miss Bridget received. For seven years the little heiress was, in
her mother's undisguised opinion, and consequently in her own, the most
important personage upon the face of this terrestrial globe. But worldly
glories are fleeting. Lord Winterfield's taste in stewed carp had been
improved by half a century's assiduous cultivation. Now the widow Price
understood the stewing of carp better than any woman in England, so his
Lordship secured to himself the benefit of her talent by making her Lady
Winterfield. In ten months after her marriage, another young lady
appeared, as much more important than Miss Bridget, as an earl is than
an attorney. Fortune, however, dispensed her gifts with tolerable
equality. Beauty and rank, indeed, were all on the side of Lady Harriet,
but the wealth lay in the scale of Miss Price; for Lord Winterfield,
leaving the bulk of his property to the children of his first marriage,
bequeathed to his youngest daughter only five thousand pounds. These
circumstances procured to Miss Price another advantage, for she married
a baronet with a considerable estate, while Lady Harriet's fate stooped
to a lieutenant in a marching regiment. After ten years, which Lady
Pelham declared were spent in uninterrupted harmony, Sir Edward Pelham
died. The exclusive property of his wife's patrimony had been strictly
secured to her; and, either thinking such a provision sufficient for a
female, or moved by a reason which we shall not at present disclose, Sir
Edward bestowed on the nephew who inherited his title, his whole estate,
burthened only with a jointure of five hundred pounds a-year, settled
upon Lady Pelham by her marriage-contract. Of his daughter, and only
child, no mention was made in his testament; but Sir Edward, during the
last years of his life, had acquired the character of an oddity, and
nobody wondered at his eccentricities. At the commencement of her
widowhood, Lady Pelham purchased a villa in ----shire, where she spent
the summer, returning in the winter to Grosvenor Street; and this last
was almost the only part of her history which was known to Laura. Even
before Lady Harriet's marriage, little cordiality had existed between
the sisters. From the date of that event, their intercourse had been
almost entirely broken off; and the only attention which Laura had ever
received from her aunt, was contained in the letter which she was now
thankfully contemplating. Her possession of this letter, together with
her acquaintance with the facts to which it related, she imagined would
form sufficient proof of her identity; and her national ideas of the
claims of relationship, awakened a hope of obtaining her aunt's
assistance in procuring some respectable situation.

Determined to avail herself of her fortunate discovery, she quitted her
father's apartments; and, carrying with her her credential, lost no time
in repairing to Grosvenor Street. Nor did she experience the reluctance
which she had formerly felt towards an interview with Lady Pelham; for
she was fully sensible of the difference between a petitioner for
charity and a candidate for honourable employment. Besides, there is no
teacher of humility like misfortune; and Laura's spirits were too
completely subdued to anticipate or to notice diminutive attacks upon
her self-consequence. She still, however, with constitutional reserve,
shrunk from intruding upon a stranger; and she passed and repassed the
door, examining the exterior of the house, as if she could thence have
inferred the character of its owner, before she took courage to give one
gentle knock.

A footman opened the door, and Laura, faltering, inquired if Lady Pelham
was within. From Laura's single knock, her humble voice, and her yet
more humble habit, which, in ten month's use, had somewhat faded from
the sober magnificence of black, the man had formed no very lofty idea
of the visitor's rank. He answered, that he believed his lady was not at
home; but half-afraid of dismissing some person with whom she might have
business, he spoke in a tone which made Laura a little doubt the truth
of his information. She inquired at what time she might be likely to
gain access to Lady Pelham; and, as she spoke, threw back her cape veil,
unconscious how successfully she was pleading her own cause. Struck with
a countenance whose candour, sweetness, and beauty, won a way to every
heart, the man gazed at her for a moment with vulgar admiration, and
then throwing open the door of a little parlour, begged her to walk in,
while he inquired whether his lady were visible. He soon returned,
telling Laura that Lady Pelham would receive her in a few minutes.

During these few minutes, Laura had formed a hundred conjectures
concerning her aunt's person, voice, and manner. She wondered whether
she resembled Lady Harriet; whether her own form would recal to Lady
Pelham the remembrance of her sister. At every noise her heart
fluttered--at every step she expected the entrance of this relation, on
whom perhaps so much of her future fate might depend; and she held her
breath that she might distinguish her approach. A servant at last came
to conduct her to his mistress; and she followed him, not without a
feeling of awe, into the presence of her mother's sister.

That sentiment, however, by no means gathered strength when she took
courage to raise her eyes to the plain little elderly person to whom she
was introduced, and heard herself addressed in the accents of cheerful
familiarity. Laura, with modest dignity, made known her name and
situation. She spoke of her mother's death, and the tears trickled from
her eyes--of her father's, and in venting the natural eloquence of
grief, she forgot that she came to interest a stranger. Lady Pelham
seemed affected; she held her handkerchief to her eyes, and remained in
that attitude for some time after Laura had recovered self-possession.
Then, throwing her arms round her lovely niece, she affectionately
acknowledged the relationship, adding, 'Your resemblance to my poor
sister cannot be overlooked, and yet in saying so, I am far from paying
you a compliment.'

After shewing Lady Pelham her own letter, and mentioning such
circumstances as tended to confirm her identity, Laura proceeded to
detail her plans, to which her Ladyship listened with apparent interest.
She inquired into Laura's accomplishments, and seemed pondering the
probability of employing them with advantage to the possessor. After a
few moments silence, she said, 'That short as their acquaintance had
been, she thought she could perceive that Laura had too much sensibility
for a dependent situation. But we shall talk of that hereafter,'
continued she. 'At present, your spirits are too weak for the society of
strangers;--and mine,' added her Ladyship, with a sigh, 'are not much
more buoyant than your own.' Laura looked up with the kindly interest
which, whether she herself were joyful or in sadness, sorrow could
always command with her; and her aunt answered her glance of inquiry, by
relating, that her only daughter and heiress, had eloped from her a few
days before, with an artful young fellow without family or fortune. 'She
deceived me by a train of the basest artifices,' said Lady Pelham,
'though she might have known that her happiness was my chief concern;
and that, to secure it, I might have been brought to consent to any
thing. Yet with the closest secrecy she misled--with the most unfeeling
coldness left me. Her disobedience I might have forgiven--her deceit I
never can; or, if as a Christian I forgive, I never, never can forget
it.'

Lady Pelham had talked herself out of breath; and Laura, not quite
understanding this kind of Christian forgiveness, was silent, because
she did not well know what to say. She felt, however, compassion for a
parent, deserted by her only child, and the feeling was legible in a
countenance peculiarly fitted for every tender expression.

There are some degrees of sorrow which increase in acuteness, at least
which augment in vehemence of expression, by the perception of having
excited sympathy. Weak fires gather strength from radiation. After a
glance at Laura, Lady Pelham melted into tears, and continued, 'I know
not how I had deserved such treatment from her; for never had she reason
to complain of me. I have always treated her with what I must call
unmerited kindness.'

Laura now ventured a few conciliating words. 'She will feel her error,
Madam,--she will strive by her after-life to atone--' Lady Pelham
immediately dried her eyes, 'No, no, my dear,' interrupted she, 'you
don't know her--you have no idea of the hardness of her unfeeling heart.
Rejoice, sweet girl, that you have no idea of it. For my part, though
sensibility is at best but a painful blessing, I would not exchange it
for the most peaceful apathy that can feel for nothing but itself. I
must have something to love and cherish. You shall be that something.
You shall live with me, and we shall console each other.'

On another occasion, Laura might have been disposed to canvass the
nature of that sensibility which could thus enlarge to a stranger on the
defects of an only child. Indeed she was little conversant even with the
name of this quality. Her own sensibility she had been taught to
consider as a weakness to be subdued, not as an ornament to be gloried
in; and the expansion of soul which opens to all the sorrows and to all
the joys of others, she had learnt to call by a holier name--to regulate
by a nobler principle. But she was little disposed to examine the merits
of a feeling to which she owed the offer of an unsolicited asylum. Her
heart swelling with gratitude, she clasped Lady Pelham's hand between
her own, and while tears streamed down her face, 'Kind considerate
friend,' she cried, 'why, why were you not known to us while my father
could have been sensible to your kindness!'

After Lady Pelham had repeated her proposal in more detail, and Laura
had thankfully acceded to it, they remained in conversation for some
time longer. Lady Pelham shewed that she had much wit, much vivacity,
and some information; and, after settling that Laura should next day
become an inmate in Grosvenor Street, they separated, mutually delighted
with each other. Lady Pelham applauded herself for a generous action,
and, to the interest which Laura awakened in every breast, was added in
Lady Pelham's all the benevolence of self-complacency. Laura, on the
other hand, did not dream that any fault could harbour in the
unsuspicious liberal heart which had believed the tale, and removed the
difficulties of a stranger. She did not once dream that she owed her new
asylum to any motives less noble than disinterested goodness.

No wonder that her Ladyship's motive escaped the penetration of Laura,
when it even evaded her own. And yet no principle could be more simple
in its nature, or more constant in its operation, than that which
influenced Lady Pelham; but the Proteus put on so many various forms,
that he ever evaded detection from the subject of his sway. In the
meantime, the desire of performing a generous action--of securing the
gratitude of a feeling heart--of patronizing a poor relation, were the
only motives which her Ladyship acknowledged to herself, when she
offered protection to Laura. An idea had, indeed, darted across her
right honourable mind, that she might now secure a humble companion at a
rate lower than the usual price of such conveniences: a momentary
notion, too, she formed of exciting the jealousy of her daughter, by
replacing her with so formidable a competitor for favour; but these, she
thought, were mere collateral advantages, and by no means the
circumstances which fixed her determination. The resolution upon which
she acted, was taken, as her resolutions generally were, without
caution; and she expressed it, as her custom was, the moment it was
formed. Laura was scarcely gone, however, when her aunt began to repent
of her precipitancy, and to wish, as she had often occasion to do, that
she had taken a little more time for consideration. But she comforted
herself, that she could at any time get rid of her charge, by
recommending Laura to one of the situations which she had mentioned as
her choice; and the lady knew it would not be difficult to find one more
lucrative than that upon which her niece was entering; for how could she
possibly offer wages to so near a relation, or insult with the gift of
a trifling sum a person of Laura's dignity of deportment? These reasons,
Lady Pelham alleged to herself, as sufficient grounds for a resolution
never to affront her niece by a tender of pecuniary favours.

While these thoughts were revolving in Lady Pelham's mind, Laura had
reached her home; and, on her knees, was thanking Providence for having
raised up for her a protector and a friend, and praying that she might
be enabled to repay, in affectionate and respectful duty, a part of the
debt of gratitude which she owed to her benefactress. The rest of the
evening she spent in preparing for her removal--in ruminating on her
interview with her aunt, and in endeavouring to compose, from the scanty
materials which she possessed, a character of this new arbitress of her
destiny. From Lady Pelham's prompt decision in favour of a stranger,
from her unreserved expression of her feelings, from her lively manner
and animated countenance, Laura concluded that she was probably of a
warm temper, susceptible, and easily wounded by unkindness or neglect,
but frank, candid, and forgiving. Laura wished that she had better
studied her aunt's physiognomy. What she recollected of it was quite
unintelligible to her. She laboured in vain to reconcile the feminine
curvatures of the nose and forehead with the inflexible closing of the
mouth, and the hard outline of the chin, where lurked no soft relenting
line.

But however the countenance might puzzle conjecture, of the mind she
harboured not a doubt; Lady Pelham's, she was persuaded, was one of
those open generous souls, which the young and unwary are always
prepared to expect and to love--souls having no disguise, and needing
none. Now this was precisely the character which Lady Pelham often and
sincerely drew of herself: and who ought to have been so intimately
acquainted with her Ladyship's dispositions?




CHAPTER XX


It was not without hesitation that Laura formed her resolution to
conceal from Hargrave her place of abode. She felt for the uneasiness
which this concealment would cause him. She feared that her desertion
might remove one incitement to a virtuous course. But she considered,
that while their future connection was doubtful, it was imprudent to
strengthen by habitual intercourse their need of each other's society;
and she reflected, that she could best estimate his character from
actions performed beyond the sphere of her influence. Her watchful
self-distrust made her fear to expose her resolution to his
importunities; and she felt the impropriety of introducing into her
aunt's family, a person who stood on terms with her which she did not
choose to explain. These reasons induced her to withhold from Hargrave
the knowledge of her new situation; and, certain that if it were known
to Mrs Stubbs or her servants he would soon be master of the secret, she
left no clue by which to trace her retreat. Perhaps, though she did not
confess it to herself, she was assisted in this act of self-command by a
latent hope, that as she was now to be introduced to a society on his
own level, Hargrave might not find the mystery quite inscrutable.

She was kindly welcomed by Lady Pelham, and took possession of a small
but commodious apartment, where she arranged her drawing-materials,
together with the few books she possessed, intending to make that her
retreat as often as her aunt found amusement or occupation independent
of her. She resolved to devote her chief attention to making herself
useful and entertaining to her patroness. In the first, she derived
hopes of success, from Lady Pelham's declared incapacity for all
employments that are strictly feminine. The second, she thought, would
be at once easy and pleasant, for Lady Pelham was acute, lively, and
communicative. This latter quality she possessed in an unusual degree,
and yet Laura found it difficult to unravel her character. In general,
she saw that her aunt's understanding was bright; she was persuaded that
in general her heart was warm and generous; but the descent to
particulars baffled Laura's penetration. Lady Pelham could amuse--could
delight; she said many wise, and many brilliant things; but her wisdom
was not always well-timed, and her brilliant things were soap-bubbles in
the sun, sparkling and highly coloured, but vanishing at the touch of
him who would examine their structure. Lady Pelham could dispute with
singular acuteness. By the use of ambiguous terms, by ingenious
sophistry, by dexterously shifting from the ground of controversy, she
could baffle, and perplex, and confound her opponents: but she could not
argue; she never convinced. Her opinions seemed fluctuating, and Laura
was sometimes ready to imagine that she defended them, not because they
were just, nor even because they were her own, but merely because she
had called them so; for with a new antagonist she could change sides,
and maintain the opposite ground with equal address.

In spite of all the warmth of heart for which she gave her heart credit,
Laura soon began to imagine that Lady Pelham had no friends. Among all
the acquaintances whom she attracted and amused, no one seemed to
exchange regard with her. The gaiety of pleasure never softened in her
presence into the tenderness of affection. Laura could not discover that
there existed one being from whose failings Lady Pelham respectfully
averted her own sight, while reverently veiling them from the eyes of
others. A few, a very few, seemed to be the objects of Lady Pelham's
esteem; those of her love Laura could not discover. Towards her,
however, her aunt expressed a strong affection; and Laura continued to
persuade herself, that if Lady Pelham had no friends, it was because she
was surrounded by those who were not worthy of her friendship.

As she appeared to invite and to desire unreserved confidence, Laura had
soon made her acquainted with the narrative of her short life, excepting
in so far as it related to Hargrave. At the detail of the unworthy
advantage which Warren had taken of Montreville's inability to enforce
his claim for the annuity, Lady Pelham broke out into sincere and
vehement expressions of indignation and contempt; for no one more
cordially abhorred oppression, or despised meanness in others. She
immediately gave directions to her man of business to attempt bringing
the affair to a conclusion, and even to threaten Warren with a
prosecution in case of his refusal. Virtuous resistance of injustice was
motive sufficient for this action. Pity that Lady Pelham should have
sought another in the economy and ease with which it promised to provide
for an indigent relative! Mr Warren was no sooner informed that the poor
obscure unfriended Laura was the niece of Lady Pelham, and the inmate of
her house, than he contrived to arrive at a marvellous certainty that
the price of the annuity had been paid, and that the mistake in the
papers relating to it originated in mere accident. In less than a
fortnight the informality was rectified, and the arrears of the annuity
paid into Laura's hands; the lawyer having first, at Lady Pelham's
desire, deducted the price of his services.

With tears in her eyes, Laura surveyed her wealth, now of diminished
value in her estimation. 'Only a few weeks ago,' said she, 'how precious
had this been to me.--But now!--Yet it is precious still,' said she, as
she wiped the tears away, 'for it can minister occasions of obedience
and usefulness.' That very day she dispatched little presents for each
of Mrs Douglas's children, in which use was more considered than show;
and in the letter which announced her gifts, she inclosed half the
remaining sum to be distributed among her own poor at Glenalbert. That
her appearance might not discredit her hostess, she next proceeded to
renew her wardrobe; and though she carefully avoided unnecessary
expence, she consulted not only decency but elegance in her attire. In
this, and all other matters of mere indifference, Laura was chiefly
guided by her aunt; for she had early observed that this lady, upon all
occasions, small as well as great, loved to exercise the office of
dictatrix. No person could have been better fitted than Laura to
conciliate such a temper; for on all the lesser occasions of submissions
she was as gentle and complying as she was inflexible upon points of
real importance. In their conversations, too, though Laura defended her
own opinions with great firmness, she so carefully avoided direct
contradiction or sarcastic retort, impatience in defeat, or triumph in
victory, that even Lady Pelham could scarcely find subject of irritation
in so mild an antagonist. In some respects, their tempers seemed to
tally admirably. Lady Pelham had great aptitude in detecting errors,
Laura a genius for remedying them. Difficulty always roused her
Ladyship's impatience, but she found an infallible resource in the
perseverance of Laura. In short, Laura contrived so many opportunities,
or seized with such happy art those which presented themselves, of
ministering to the comfort or convenience of her aunt, that she became
both respectable and necessary to her; and this was, generally speaking,
the utmost extent of Lady Pelham's attachments.

Lady Pelham sometimes spoke of her daughter, and Laura never missed the
opportunity of urging a reconciliation. She insisted that the rights of
natural affection were unalienable; that as they did not rest upon the
merits, so neither could they be destroyed by the unworthiness either of
parents or of children. The mother answered, with great impatience, that
Laura's argument was entirely founded on prejudice; that it was true
that for the helplessness of infancy, a peculiar feeling was provided;
but that in all animals this peculiar feeling ceased as soon as it was
no longer essential to the existence of the individual. 'From
thenceforth,' added she, 'the regard must be founded on the qualities of
the head and heart; and if my child is destitute of these, I can see no
reason why I should prefer her to the child of any other woman.' 'Ah!'
said Laura, tears of grateful recollection rushing down her cheek, 'some
parents have loved their child with a fervour which no worth of hers
could merit.' The gush of natural sensibility for this time averted the
rising storm; but the next time that Laura renewed her conciliatory
efforts, Lady Pelham, growing more vehement as she became herself
convinced that she was in the wrong, burst into a paroxysm of rage; and,
execrating all rebellious children, and their defenders, commanded Laura
in future to confine her attention to what might concern herself.

The humbling spectacle of a female face distorted with passion was not
quite new to Laura. Undismayed, she viewed it with calm commiseration;
and mildly expressing her sorrow for having given offence, took up her
work and left the ferment to subside at leisure. Her Ladyship's passion
soon cooled; and, making advances with a sort of surly condescension,
she entered on a new topic. Laura answered exactly as if nothing
disagreeable had happened; and Lady Pelham could not divine whether her
niece commanded her countenance, or her temper. Upon one principle of
judging the lady had grounds for her doubt; she herself had sometimes
commanded her countenance--her temper never.

Laura not only habitually avoided giving or taking offence, but made it
a rule to extinguish its last traces by some act of cordiality and
good-will. This evening, therefore, she proposed, with a grace which
seemed rather to petition a favour than to offer a service, to attempt
a portrait of her aunt. The offer was accepted with pleasure, and the
portrait begun on the following day. It proved a likeness, and a
favourable one. Lady Pelham was kinder than ever. Laura avoided the
prohibited subject, and all was quiet and serene. Lady Pelham at last
herself reverted to it; for indeed she could not long forbear to speak
upon any topic that roused her passions. No dread of personal
inconvenience could deter Laura from an act of justice or mercy, and she
again steadily pronounced her opinion. But aware that one who would
persuade must be careful not to irritate, she expressed her sentiments
with still more cautious gentleness than formerly; and perceiving that
her aunt was far more governed by passion than by reason, she quitted
argument for entreaty. By these means she avoided provoking hostility,
though she failed to win compliance. Lady Pelham seemed to be utterably
impenetrable to entreaty, or to take pride in resisting it, and Laura
had only to hope that time would favour her suit.

Lady Pelham mentioned an intention of moving early to the country, and
Laura rejoiced in the prospect of once more beholding the open face of
Heaven--of listening to nature's own music--of breathing the light air
of spring. She longed to turn her ear from the discords of the city to
the sweet sounds of peace--her eye from countenances wan with care,
flushed with intemperance, or ghastly with famine, to cheeks brown with
wholesome exercise, or ruddy with health and contentment--to exchange
the sight of dusky brick walls, and walks overlooked by thousands, for
the sunny slope or the sheltered solitary lane. Lady Pelham took
pleasure in describing the beauties of Walbourne, and Laura listened to
her with interest, anticipating eagerly the time when she should inhabit
so lovely, so peaceful a scene. But that interest and eagerness rose to
the highest, when she accidentally discovered that the De Courcy family
were Lady Pelham's nearest neighbours in the country.

The want of something to love and cherish, which was with her Ladyship a
mere form of speech, was with Laura a real necessity of nature; and
though it was one which almost every situation could supply, since every
creature that approached her was the object of her benevolence, yet much
of the happiness of so domestic a being depended on the exercise of the
dearer charities, and no one was more capable of a distinguishing
preference than Laura. She had a hearty regard for the De Courcy family.
She revered Mrs De Courcy; she liked Harriet; and bestowed on Montague
her cordial esteem and gratitude. This gratitude had now acquired a
sacred tenderness; for it was associated in her mind with the
remembrance of a parent. De Courcy's self-denial had cheered her
father's sick-bed, his benevolence gladdened her father's heart, and his
self-denial appeared more venerable, his benevolence more endearing.

Having written to inform Harriet of the change in her situation, she
discovered from her answer a new proof of De Courcy's friendship, in the
fruitless journey which he had made to relieve her, and she regretted
that her caution had deprived her of an opportunity of seeing and
thanking him for all his kindness. 'Yet, if we had met,' said she, 'I
should probably have acted as I have done a thousand times before; left
him to believe me an insensible, ungrateful creature, for want of
courage to tell him that I was not so.' She longed, however, to see De
Courcy; for with him she thought she could talk of her father--to him
lament her irreparable loss, dwell with him on the circumstances that
aggravated her sorrow--on the prospects which mingled that sorrow with
hope. This was a subject on which she never entered with Lady Pelham any
farther than necessity required--real sorrow has its holy ground, on
which no vulgar foot must tread. The self-command of Laura would have
forbidden her, in any situation, to darken with a settled gloom the
sunshine of domestic cheerfulness; but Lady Pelham had in her somewhat
which repels the confidence of grief. Against all the arrows of
misfortune, blunted at least as they rebound from the breasts of others,
she seemed to 'wear a charmed life.' She often indeed talked of
sensibility, and reprobated the want of it as the worst of faults; but
the only kind of it in which she indulged rather inclined to the
acrimonious than the benevolent, and Laura began to perceive, that
however her aunt might distinguish them in others, irascible passions
and keen feelings were in herself synonymous.

After the effort of giving and receiving the entertainment which Lady
Pelham constantly offered, and as constantly exacted in return, Laura
experienced a sensation of recovered freedom when the arrival of a
visitor permitted her to escape to her own apartment. She saw nobody but
her aunt, and never went abroad except to church. Thus, during a
fortnight which she had passed in Grosvenor Street she had heard nothing
of Hargrave. She was anxious to know whether he visited Lady Pelham;
for, with rustic ignorance, she imagined that all people of condition
who resided in the same town must be known to each other; but she had
not courage to ask, and searched in vain for his name among the cards
that crowded the table in the lobby. Though she was conscious of some
curiosity to know how he employed the hours which her absence left
vacant, she did not own to herself that she was at all concerned in a
resolution which she took, to inquire in person whether any letters had
been left for her with Mrs Stubbs. She did not choose to commit the
inquiry to a servant, because she would not condescend to enjoin her
messenger to secrecy as to the place of her abode; and she continued
resolved to give her lover no clue to discover it.

Accordingly, she early one morning set out in a hackney-coach, which she
took the precaution to leave at some distance from her old lodgings,
ordering it to wait her return. Fanny was delighted to see her, and
charmed with the improvement of her dress, and the returning
healthfulness of her appearance; but the landlady eyed her askance, and
surlily answered to her inquiry for her letters, that she would bring
the only one she had got; muttering, as she went to fetch it, something
of which the words 'secret doings' were all that reached Laura's ear.
'There, Miss,' said the ungracious Mrs Stubbs, 'there's your letter, and
there's the queer scrawl it came wrapped up in.' 'Mr De Courcy's hand,'
cried Laura surprised, but thinking, from its size, that some time would
be required to read it, she deferred breaking the seal till she should
return to her carriage. 'I suppose you're mistaken, Miss,' said Mrs
Stubbs; 'Mr De Courcy was here twice the day it came, and he never said
a word of it.'

Laura now tremulously inquired whether she might be permitted to visit
her father's room; but being roughly answered that it was occupied, she
quietly prepared to go. As Fanny followed her through the garden, to
open the gate for her, Laura, a conscious blush rising to her face,
inquired whether any body else had inquired for her since her departure.
Fanny, who was ready to burst with the news of Hargrave's visit, and who
was just meditating how she might venture to introduce it, improved this
occasion of entering on a full detail of his behaviour. With the true
waiting-maid-like fondness for romance, she enlarged upon all his
extravagancies, peeping side-long now and then under Laura's bonnet, to
catch encouragement from the complacent simper with which such tales are
often heard. But no smile repaid her eloquence. With immoveable
seriousness did Laura listen to her, gravely revolving the strange
nature of that love which could so readily amalgamate with rage and
jealousy, and every discordant passion. She was hurt at the indecorum
which exposed these weaknesses to the observation of a servant; and
with a sigh reflected, that, to constitute the happiness of a woman of
sense and spirit, a husband must be possessed of qualities respectable
as well as amiable.

Fanny next tried, whether what concerned De Courcy might not awaken more
apparent interest; and here she had at least a better opportunity to
judge of the effect of her narrative, for Laura stopped and turned full
towards her. But Fanny had now no transports to relate, except De
Courcy's indignation of Mrs Stubbs' calumny; and it was not without
hesitating, and qualifying, and apologizing, that the girl ventured to
hint at the insinuation which her mistress had thrown out. She had at
last succeeded in raising emotion, for indignant crimson dyed Laura's
cheeks, and fire flashed from her eyes. But Laura seldom spoke while she
was angry; and again she silently pursued her way. 'Pray, Madam,' said
the girl as she was opening the gate, 'do be so good as to tell me where
you live now, that nobody may speak ill of you before me?' 'I thank you,
my good girl,' returned Laura, a placid smile again playing on her
countenance; 'but my character is in no danger.--You were kind to us,
Fanny, when you knew that we could not reward you; accept of this from
me;' and she put five guineas into her hand. 'No, indeed, Ma'am,' cried
Fanny, drawing back her hand and colouring; 'I was civil for pure good
will, and--.' Laura, whose sympathy with her inferiors was not confined
to her bodily wants, fully understood the feeling that revolts from
bartering for gold alone the service of the heart. 'I know it my dear,'
answered she, in an affectionate tone; 'and believe me, I only mean to
acknowledge, not to repay, your kindness.' Fanny, however, persisted in
her refusal, and Laura obliged her to leave her at the gate, where, with
tears in her eyes, the girl stood gazing after her till she was out of
sight. 'I'm sure,' said she, turning towards the house as Laura
disappeared, 'I'm sure she was made to be a queen, for the more one
likes her, the more she frightens one.'

As soon as Laura was seated in her carriage, she opened her packet, and
with momentary disappointment examined its contents. 'Not one line!' she
cried in a tone of mortification; and then turned to the envelope
addressed to Mrs Stubbs. Upon comparing this with the circumstances
which she had lately heard, she at once comprehended De Courcy's
intention of serving her by stealth, foregoing the credit due to his
generosity. She wondered, indeed, that he had neglected to disguise his
hand-writing in the superscription. 'Did he think,' said she, 'that I
could have forgotten the writing that has so often brought comfort to my
father?' She little guessed how distant from his mind was the repose
which can attend to minute contrivance.

Delighted to discover a trait of character which tallied so well with
her preconceived opinion, she no sooner saw Lady Pelham than she related
it to her aunt, and began a warm eulogium on De Courcy's temper and
dispositions. Lady Pelham coldly cut her short, by saying, 'I believe Mr
De Courcy is a very good young man, but I am not very fond of prodigies.
One can't both wonder and like at a time; your men with two heads are
always either supposititious or disgusting.' This speech was one of the
dampers which the warm heart abhors; real injury could not more
successfully chill affection or repress confidence. It had just malice
and just truth enough to be provoking; and for the second time that day
Laura had to strive with the risings of anger. She was upon the point of
saying, 'So, aware of the impossibility of being at once wonderful and
pleasing, your Ladyship, I suppose, aims at only one of these objects;'
but ere the sarcasm found utterance, she checked herself, and hastened
out of the room, with the sensation of having escaped from danger. She
retired to write to De Courcy a letter of grateful acknowledgment; in
which, after having received Lady Pelham's approbation, she inclosed his
gift, explaining the circumstances which now rendered it unnecessary.

Lady Pelham was not more favourable to the rest of the De Courcy family
than she had been to Montague. She owned, indeed, that Mrs De Courcy was
the best woman in the world, but a virtue, she said, so cased in armour,
necessarily precluded all grace or attraction. Harriet she characterized
as a little sarcastic coquette. Laura, weary of being exposed to the
double peril of weakly defending, or angrily supporting her attacked
friends, ceased to mention the De Courcys at all; though, with a
pardonable spirit of contradiction, she loved them the better for the
unprovoked hostility of Lady Pelham. The less she talked of them, the
more she longed for the time when she might, unrestrained, exchange with
them testimonies of regard. The trees in the Park, as they burst into
leaf, stimulated Laura's desire for the country; and while she felt the
genial air of spring, or listened to the early song of some luckless
bird caged in a neighbouring window, or saw the yellow glories of the
crocus peeping from its unnatural sanctuary, she counted the days till
her eyes should be gladdened with the joyous face of nature. Only a
fortnight had now to pass before her wish was to be gratified, for Lady
Pelham intended at the end of that time to remove to Walbourne.

Laura was just giving the finishing touches to her aunt's portrait when
a visitor was announced; and, very unwilling to break off at this
interesting crisis, Lady Pelham having first scolded the servant for
letting in her friend, desired him to shew the lady into the room where
Laura was at work. The usual speeches being made, the lady began--'Who
does your ladyship think bowed to me _en passant_ just as I was getting
out of the carriage?--Why, Lady Bellamer!--Can you conceive such
effrontery?' 'Indeed, I think, in common modesty, she should have waited
for your notice!' 'Do you know, I am told on good authority that
Hargrave is determined not to marry her.' Laura's breath came
short.--'He is very right,' returned Lady Pelham. 'A man must be a great
fool to marry where he has had such damning proofs of frailty.' Laura's
heart seemed to pause for a moment, and then to redouble its
beating.--'What Hargrave can this be?' thought she; but she durst not
inquire. 'I hear,' resumed the lady, 'that his uncle is enraged at him,
and more for the duel than the _crim. con._' The pencils dropped from
Laura's hand.--Fain would she have inquired, what she yet so much
dreaded to know; but her tongue refused its office. 'I see no cause for
that,' returned Lady Pelham; 'Hargrave could not possibly refuse to
fight after such an affair.' 'Oh certainly not!' replied the lady; 'but
Lord Lincourt thinks, that in such a case, Hargrave ought to have
insisted upon giving Lord Bellamer the first fire, and then have fired
his own pistol in the air.--But, bless me, what ails Miss Montreville,'
cried the visitor, looking at Laura, who, dreadfully convinced, was
stealing out of the room. 'Nothing,' answered Laura; and fainted.

Lady Pelham called loudly for help; and, while the servants were
administering it, stood by conjecturing what could be the cause of
Laura's illness; wondering whether it could have any possible connection
with Colonel Hargrave; or whether it were the effect of mere
constitutional habit.

The moment Laura shewed signs of recollection, Lady Pelham began her
interrogation. 'What has been the matter my dear? What made you ill? Did
any thing affect you? Are you subject to faintings?' Laura remained
silent, and, closing her eyes, seemed deaf to all her aunt's questions.
After a pause, Lady Pelham renewed the attack.--'Have you any concern
with Colonel Hargrave, Laura?' 'None,' answered Laura, with a smile of
ineffable bitterness; and again closing her eyes, maintained an
obstinate silence. Weary of ineffectual inquiries, Lady Pelham quitted
her, giving orders, that she should be assisted into bed, and
recommending to her to take some rest.

Vain advice! Laura could not rest! From the stupor which had overpowered
her faculties, she awoke to the full conviction, that all her earthly
prospects were for ever darkened. Just entering on life, she seemed
already forsaken of all its hopes, and all its joys. The affections
which had delighted her youth were torn from the bleeding soul; no
sacred connection remained to bless her maturity; no endearment awaited
her decline. In all her long and dreary journey to the grave, she saw no
kindly resting-place. Still Laura's hopes and wishes had never been
bounded to this narrow sphere; and when she found here no rest for the
sole of her foot, she had, in the promises of religion, an ark whither
she could turn for shelter. But how should she forget that these
promises extended not to Hargrave. How shut her ear to the dread voice
which, in threatening the adulterer and the murderer, denounced
vengeance against Hargrave! With horror unspeakable she considered his
incorrigible depravity; with agony, revolved its fearful consequences.

Yet, while the guilt was hateful in her eyes, her heart was full of love
and compassion for the offender. The feeling with which she remembered
his unfaithfulness to her had no resemblance to jealousy. 'He has been
misled,' she cried; 'vilely betrayed by a wretch, who has taken
advantage of his weakness. Oh how could she look on that form, that
countenance, and see in them only the objects of a passion, vile as the
heart that cherished it.'--Then she would repent of her want of
candour.--'I am unjust, I am cruel,' she said, 'thus to load with all
the burden of this foul offence, her who had perhaps the least share in
it.--No! He must have been the tempter; it is not in woman to be so
lost.'

But in the midst of sorrow, whose violence seemed at times almost to
confuse her reason, she never hesitated for a moment on the final
dissolution of her connection with Hargrave. She formed no resolution on
a subject where no alternative seemed to remain, but assumed, as the
foundation of all her plans of joyless duty, her eternal separation from
Hargrave; a separation final as death. By degrees she became more able
to collect her thoughts; and the close of a sleepless night found her
exercising the valuable habit of seeking in herself the cause of her
misfortunes. The issue of her self-examination was the conviction, that
she had bestowed on a frail fallible creature, a love disproportioned
to the merits of any created thing; that she had obstinately clung to
her idol after she had seen its baseness; and that now the broken reed
whereon she had leaned was taken away, that she might restore her trust
and her love where alone they were due. That time infallibly brings
comfort even to the sorest sorrows--that if we make not shipwreck of
faith and a good conscience, we save from the storms of life the
materials of peace at least--that lesser joys become valuable when we
are deprived of those of keener relish--are lessons which even
experience teaches but slowly: and Laura had them yet in a great measure
to learn. She was persuaded that she should go on mourning to the grave.
What yet remained of her path of life seemed to lie through a desert
waste, never more to be warmed with the sunshine of affection; never
more to be brightened with any ray of hope, save that which beamed from
beyond the tomb. She imagined, that lonely and desolate she should pass
through life, and joyfully hail the messenger that called her away; like
some wretch, who, cast alone on a desert rock, watches for the sail that
is to waft him to his native land.

The despair of strong minds is not listless or inactive. The more Laura
was convinced that life was lost as to all its pleasing purposes, the
more was she determined that it should be subservient to useful ends.
Earthly felicity, she was convinced, had fled for ever from her grasp;
and the only resolution she could form, was never more to pursue it;
but, in the persevering discharge of the duties which yet remained to
her, to seek a preparation for joys which earth has not to bestow. That
she might not devote to fruitless lamentation the time which was claimed
by duty, she, as soon as it was day, attempted to rise, intending to
spend the morning in acts of resignation for herself, and prayers that
pardon and repentance might be granted to him whose guilt had destroyed
her peace. But her head was so giddy, that, unable to stand, she was
obliged to return to her bed. It was long ere she was again able to quit
it. A slow fever seized her, and brought her to the brink of the grave.
Her senses, however, remained uninjured, and she had full power and
leisure to make those reflections which force themselves upon all who
are sensible of approaching dissolution. Happy were it, if all who smart
under disappointment, would anticipate the hour which will assuredly
arrive, when the burden which they impatiently bear shall appear to be
lighter than vanity! The hand which is soon to be cold, resigns without
a struggle the baubles of the world. Its cheats delude not the eye that
is for ever closing. A deathbed is that holy ground where the charms of
the enchanter are dissolved; where the forms which he had clothed with
unreal beauty, or aggravated to gigantic horror, are seen in their true
form and colouring. In its true form and colouring did Laura behold her
disappointment; when, with characteristic firmness, she had wrung from
her attendants, a confession of her danger. With amazement she looked
back on the infatuation which could waste on any concern less than
eternal, the hopes, the fears, and the wishes which she had squandered
on a passion which now seemed trivial as the vapour scattered by the
wind.

At last, aided by the rigid temperance of her former life, and her
exemplary patience in suffering, the strength of her constitution began
to triumph over her disorder. As she measured her steps back to earth
again, the concerns which had seemed to her reverting eye diminished
into nothing, again swelled into importance; but Laura could not soon
forget the time when she had seen them as they were; and this
remembrance powerfully aided her mind in its struggle to cast off its
now disgraceful shackles. Yet bitter was the struggle; for what is so
painful as to tear at once from the breast what has twined itself with
every fibre, linked itself with every hope, stimulated every desire, and
long furnished objects of intense, of unceasing interest. The heart
which death leaves desolate, slowly and gently resigns the affection to
which it has fondly clung. It is permitted to seek indulgence in
virtuous sorrow, to rejoice in religious hope; and even memory brings
pleasure dear to the widowed mind. But she who mourned the depravity of
her lover, felt that she was degraded by her sorrow; hope was, as far as
he was concerned, utterly extinguished; and memory presented only a
mortifying train of weaknesses and self-deceptions.

But love is not that irremediable calamity which romance has delighted
to paint, and the vulgar to believe it. Time, vanity, absence, or any of
a hundred other easy remedies, serves to cure the disease in the mild
form in which it affects feeble minds, while more Herculean spirits tear
off the poisoned garment, though it be with mortal anguish. In a few
weeks, the passion which had so long disturbed the peace of Laura was
hushed to lasting repose; but it was the repose of the land where the
whirlwind has passed; dreary and desolate. Her spirits had received a
shock from which it was long, very long, ere she could rouse them. And
he who had ceased to be an object of passion, still excited an interest
which no other human being could awaken. Many a wish did she breathe
for his happiness; many a fervent prayer for his reformation. In spite
of herself, she lamented the extinguished love, as well as the lost
lover; and never remembered, without a heavy sigh, that the season of
enthusiastic attachment was, with her, passed never to return.

But she cordially wished that she might never again behold the cause of
so much anguish and humiliation. She longed to be distant from all
chance of such a meeting, and was anxious to recover strength sufficient
for her journey to Walbourne. Lady Pelham only waited for her niece's
recovery; and, as soon as she could bear the motion of a carriage, they
left London.




CHAPTER XXI


They travelled slowly, and Laura's health seemed improved by the
journey. The reviving breeze of early spring, the grass field exchanging
its winter olive for a bright green, the ploughman's cheerful labour,
the sower whistling to his measured step, the larch trees putting forth
the first and freshest verdure of the woods, the birds springing busy
from the thorn, were objects whose cheering influence would have been
lost on many a querulous child of disappointment. But they were
industriously improved to their proper use by Laura, who acknowledged in
them the kindness of a father, mingling with some cordial drop even the
bitterest cup of sorrow. The grief which had fastened on her heart she
never obtruded on her companion. She behaved always with composure,
sometimes with cheerfulness. She never obliquely reflected upon
Providence, by insinuations of the hardness of her fate, nor indulged in
splenetic dissertations on the inconstancy and treachery of man. Indeed
she never, by the most distant hint, approached the ground of her own
peculiar sorrow. She could not, without the deepest humiliation, reflect
that she had bestowed her love on an object so unworthy. She burnt with
shame at the thought of having been so blinded, so infatuated, by
qualities merely external. While she remembered, with extreme vexation,
that she had suffered Hargrave to triumph in the confession of her
regard, she rejoiced that no other witness existed of her folly--that
she had never breathed the mortifying secret into any other ear.

In this frame of mind, she repelled with calm dignity every attempt
which Lady Pelham made to penetrate her sentiments; and behaved in such
a manner that her aunt could not discover whether her spirits were
affected by languor of body or by distress of mind. Laura, indeed, had
singular skill in the useful art of repulsing without offence; and Lady
Pelham, spite of her curiosity, found it impossible to question her
niece with freedom. Notwithstanding her youth, and her almost dependent
situation, Laura inspired Lady Pelham with involuntary awe. Her
dignified manners, her vigorous understanding, the inflexible integrity
which descended even to the regulation of her forms of speech, extorted
some degree of respectful caution from one not usually over careful of
giving offence. Lady Pelham was herself at times conscious of this
restraint; and her pride was wounded by it. In Laura's absence, she
sometimes thought of it with impatience, and resolved to cast it off at
their next interview; but whenever they met, the unoffending majesty of
Laura effaced her resolution, or awed her from putting it in practice.
She could not always, however, refrain from using that sort of innuendo
which is vulgarly called _talking at_ one's companions; a sort of
rhetoric in great request with those who have more spleen than courage,
and which differs from common scolding only in being a little more
cowardly and a little more provoking. All her Ladyship's dexterity and
perseverance in this warfare were entirely thrown away. Whatever might
be meant, Laura answered to nothing but what met the ear; and, with
perverse simplicity, avoided the particular application of general
propositions. Lady Pelham next tried to coax herself into Laura's
confidence. She redoubled her caresses and professions of affection. She
hinted, not obscurely, that if Laura would explain her wishes, they
would meet with indulgence, and even assistance, from zealous
friendship. Her professions were received with gratitude--her caresses
returned with sensibility; but Laura remained impenetrable. Lady
Pelham's temper could never brook resistance; and she would turn from
Laura in a pet:--the pitiful garb of anger which cannot disguise, and
dares not show itself. But Laura never appeared to bestow the slightest
notice on her caprice, and received her returning smiles with unmoved
complacency. Laura would fain have loved her aunt; but in spite of
herself, her affection took feeble root amidst these alternations of
frost and sunshine. She was weary of hints and insinuations; and felt
not a little pleased that Lady Pelham's fondness for improving and
gardening seemed likely to release her, during most of the hours of
daylight, from this sort of sharpshooting warfare.

It was several days after their arrival at Walbourne before they were
visited by any of the De Courcy family. Undeceived in his hopes of
Laura's regard, Montague was almost reluctant to see her again. Yet
from the hour when he observed Lady Pelham's carriage drive up the
avenue, he had constantly chosen to study at a window which looked
towards Walbourne. Laura, too, often looked towards Norwood, excusing to
herself the apparent neglect of her friends, by supposing that they had
not been informed of her arrival. Lady Pelham was abroad superintending
her gardeners, and Laura employed in her own apartment, when she was
called to receive De Courcy. For the first time since the wreck of all
her hopes, joy flushed the wan cheek of Laura, and fired her eye with
transient lustre. 'I shall hear the voice of friendship once more,' said
she, and she hastened down stairs with more speed than suited her but
half-recovered strength. 'Dear Mr De Courcy,' she cried, joyfully
advancing towards him! De Courcy scarcely ventured to raise his eyes.
Laura held out her hand to him. 'She loves a libertine!' thought he,
and, scarcely touching it, he drew back. With grief and surprise, Laura
read the cold and melancholy expression of his face. Her feeble spirits
failed under so chilling a reception; and while, in a low tremulous
voice, she inquired for Mrs and Miss De Courcy, unbidden tears wandered
down her cheeks. In replying, Montague again turned his eyes towards
her; and, shocked at the paleness and dejection of her altered
countenance, remembered only Laura ill and in sorrow. 'Good Heavens!' he
exclaimed, with a voice of the tenderest interest, 'Laura--Miss
Montreville, you are ill--you are unhappy!' Laura, vexed that her
weakness should thus extort compassion, hastily dried her tears. 'I have
been ill,' said she, 'and am still so weak that any trifle can
discompose me.' Montague's colour rose. 'It is then a mere trifle in her
eyes,' thought he, 'that I should meet her with coldness.' 'And yet,'
continued Laura, reading mortification in his face, 'it is no trifle to
fear that I have given offence where I owe so much gratitude.' 'Talk not
of gratitude, I beseech you,' said De Courcy, 'I have no claim, no wish,
to excite it.' 'Mr De Courcy,' cried Laura, bursting into tears of sad
remembrance, 'has all your considerate friendship, all your soothing
kindness to him who is gone, no claim to the gratitude of his child!'
Montague felt that he stood at this moment upon dangerous ground, and he
gladly availed himself of this opportunity to quit it. He led Laura to
talk of her father, and of the circumstances of his death; and was not
ashamed to mingle sympathetic tears with those which her narrative wrung
from her. In her detail, she barely hinted at the labour by which she
had supported her father; and avoided all allusion to the wants which
she had endured. If any thing could have exalted her in the opinion of
De Courcy, it would have been the humility which sought no praise to
recompense exertion--no admiration to reward self-denial. 'The praise of
man is with her as nothing,' thought he, gazing on her wasted form and
faded features with fonder adoration than ever he had looked on her full
blaze of beauty. 'She has higher hopes and nobler aims. And can such a
creature love a sensualist!--Now, too, when his infamy cannot be unknown
to her! Yet it must be so--she has never named him, even while
describing scenes where he was daily present; and why this silence if he
were indifferent to her? If I durst mention him!--but I cannot give her
pain.'

From this reverie De Courcy was roused by the entrance of Lady Pelham,
whose presence brought to his recollection the compliments and
ceremonial which Laura had driven from his mind. He apologized for
having delayed his visit; and excused himself for having made it alone,
by saying that his sister was absent on a visit to a friend, and that
his mother could not yet venture abroad; but he warmly entreated that
the ladies would wave etiquette, and see Mrs De Courcy at Norwood. Lady
Pelham, excusing herself for the present on the plea of her niece's
indisposition, urged De Courcy to direct his walks often towards
Walbourne; in charity, she said, to Laura, who being unable to take
exercise, spent her forenoons alone, sighing, she supposed, for some
Scotch Strephon. Laura blushed; and Montague took his leave, pondering
whether the blush was deepened by any feeling of consciousness.

'She has a witchcraft in her that no language can express--no heart
withstand--,' said De Courcy, suddenly breaking a long silence, as he
and his mother were sitting tête à tête after dinner. 'Marriage is an
excellent talisman against witchcraft,' said De Courcy, gravely; 'but
Miss Montreville has charms that will delight the more the better they
are known. There is such noble simplicity, such considerate benevolence,
such total absence of vanity and selfishness in her character, that no
woman was ever better fitted to embellish and endear domestic life.'
'Perhaps in time,' pursued De Courcy, 'I might have become not unworthy
of such a companion--But now it matters not,'--and, suppressing a very
bitter sigh, he took up a book which he had of late been reading to his
mother. 'You know, Montague,' said Mrs De Courcy, 'I think differently
from you upon this subject. I am widely mistaken in Miss Montreville, if
she could bestow her preference on a libertine, knowing him to be
such.' Montague took involuntary pleasure in hearing this opinion
repeated; yet he had less faith in it than he usually had in the
opinions of his mother. 'After the emotion which his presence excited,'
returned he,--'an emotion which even these low people--I cannot think of
it with patience,' cried he, tossing away the book, and walking hastily
up and down the room. 'To betray her weakness, her _only_ weakness, to
such observers--to the wretch himself.' 'My dear De Courcy, do you make
no allowance for the exaggeration, the rage for the romantic, so common
to uneducated minds?' 'Wilkins could have no motive for inventing such a
tale,' replied De Courcy; 'and if it had _any_ foundation, there is no
room for doubt.' 'Admitting the truth of all you have heard,' resumed
Mrs De Courcy, 'I see no reason for despairing of success. If I know any
thing of character, Miss Montreville's attachments will ever follow
excellence, real or imaginary. Your worth is real, Montague; and, as
such, it will in time approve itself to her.' 'Ah, Madam, had her
affection been founded even on imaginary excellence, must it not now
have been completely withdrawn--now, when she cannot be unacquainted
with his depravity. Yet she loves him still.--I am sure she loves him.
Why else this guarded silence in regard to him?--Why not mention that
she permitted his daily visits--saw him even on the night when her
father died?' 'Supposing,' returned Mrs De Courcy, 'that her affection
had been founded on imaginary excellence, might not traces of the ruins
remain perceptible, even after the foundation had been taken away? Come,
come, Montague, you are only four-and-twenty, you can afford a few years
patience. If you act prudently, I am convinced that your perseverance
will succeed; but if it should not, I know how you can bear
disappointment. I am certain that your happiness depends not on the
smile of any face, however fair.' 'I am ashamed,' said De Courcy, 'to
confess how much my peace depends upon Laura. You know I have no
ambition--all my joys must be domestic. It is as a husband and a father
that all my wishes must be fulfilled--and all that I have ever fancied
of venerable and endearing, so meet in her, that no other woman can ever
fill her place.' 'That you have no ambition,' replied Mrs De Courcy, 'is
one of the reasons why I join in your wishes. If your happiness had any
connection with splendour, I should have regretted your choice of a
woman without fortune. But all that is necessary for your comfort you
will find in the warmth of heart with which Laura will return your
affection--the soundness of principle with which she will assist you in
your duties. Still, perhaps, you might find these qualities in others,
though not united in an equal degree; but I confess to you, Montague, I
despair of your again meeting with a woman whose dispositions and
pursuits are so congenial to your own;--a woman, whose cultivated mind
and vigorous understanding, may make her the companion of your studies
as well as of your lighter hours.' 'My dear mother,' cried De Courcy,
affectionately grasping her hand, 'it is no wonder that I persecute you
with this subject so near to my heart for you always, and you alone,
support my hopes. Yet should I even at last obtain this treasure, I must
ever regret that I cannot awaken the enthusiasm which belongs only to a
first attachment.' 'Montague,' said Mrs De Courcy, smiling, 'from what
romance have you learnt that sentiment? However I shall not attempt the
labour of combating it, for I prophesy that, before the change can be
necessary, you will learn to be satisfied with being loved with reason.'
'Many a weary day must pass before I can even hope for this cold
preference. Indeed, if her choice is to be decided by mere rational
approbation, why should I hope that it will fall upon me? Yet, if it be
possible, her friendship I will gain--and I would not exchange it for
the love of all her sex.' 'She already esteems you--highly esteems you,'
said Mrs De Courcy; 'and I repeat that I think you need not despair of
animating esteem into a warmer sentiment. But will you profit by my
knowledge of my sex, Montague? You know, the less use we make of our own
wisdom, the fonder we grow of bestowing it on others in the form of
advice! Keep your secret carefully, Montague. Much of your hope depends
on your caution. Pretensions to a pre-engaged heart are very generally
repaid with dislike.' Montague promised attention to his mother's
advice; but added, that he feared he should not long be able to follow
it. 'I am a bad dissembler,' said he, 'and on this subject, it is
alleged, that ladies are eagle-eyed.' 'Miss Montreville, of all women
living, has the least vanity,' returned Mrs De Courcy; 'and you may
always reinforce your caution, by recollecting that the prepossessions
which will certainly be against you as a lover, may be secured in your
favour as a friend.'

The next day found De Courcy again at Walbourne; and again he enjoyed a
long and private interview with Laura. Though their conversation turned
only on indifferent subjects, De Courcy observed the settled melancholy
which had taken possession of her mind. It was no querulous complaining
sorrow, but a calm sadness, banishing all the cheerful illusions of a
life which it still valued as the preparation for a better. To that
better world all her hopes and wishes seemed already fled; and the saint
herself seemed waiting, with resigned desire, for permission to depart.
De Courcy's fears assigned to her melancholy its true cause. He would
have given worlds to know the real state of her sentiments, and to
ascertain how far her attachment had survived the criminality of
Hargrave. But he had not courage to probe the painful wound. He could
not bear to inflict upon Laura even momentary anguish; perhaps he even
feared to know the full extent of those regrets which she lavished on
his rival. With scrupulous delicacy he avoided approaching any subject
which could at all lead her thoughts towards the cause of her sorrow,
and never even seemed to notice the dejection which wounded him to the
soul.

'The spring of her mind is for ever destroyed,' said he to Mrs De
Courcy, 'and yet she retains all her angelic benevolence. She strives to
make pleasing to others, the objects that will never more give pleasure
to her.' Mrs De Courcy expressed affectionate concern, but added, 'I
never knew of a sorrow incurable at nineteen. We must bring Laura to
Norwood, and find employments for her suited to her kindly nature.
Meanwhile do you exert yourself to rouse her; and, till she is well
enough to leave home, I shall freely resign to her all my claims upon
your time.' De Courcy faithfully profited by his mother's permission,
and found almost every day an excuse for visiting Walbourne. Sometimes
he brought a book which he read aloud to the ladies; sometimes he
borrowed one, which he chose to return in person; now he wished to shew
Laura a medal, and now he had some particularly fine flower-seeds for
Lady Pelham. Chemical experiments were an excellent pretext; for they
were seldom completed at a visit, and the examination of one created a
desire for another. Laura was not insensible to his attentions. She
believed that he attributed whatever was visible of her depression to
regrets for her father; and she was by turns ashamed of permitting her
weakness to wear the mask of filial piety, and thankful that she escaped
the degradation of being pitied as a love-sick girl. But love had now no
share in Laura's melancholy. Compassion, strong indeed to a painful
excess, was the only gentle feeling that mingled with the pain of
remembering Hargrave. Who that, in early youth, gives way to the
chilling conviction, that nothing on earth will ever again kindle a wish
or a hope, can look without sadness on the long pilgrimage that spreads
before them? Laura looked upon hers with resigned sadness, and a
thousand times repeated to herself that it was but a point, compared
with what lay beyond. Hopeless of happiness, she yet forced herself to
seek short pleasure in the charms of nature, and the comforts of
affluence; calling them the flowers which a bountiful hand had scattered
in the desert which it was needful that she should tread alone. It was
with some surprise that she found De Courcy's visits produced pleasure
without requiring an effort to be pleased; and with thankfulness she
acknowledged that the enjoyments of the understanding were still open to
her, though those of the heart were for ever withdrawn.

In the meantime her health improved rapidly, and she was able to join in
Lady Pelham's rambles in the shrubbery. To avoid particularity, De
Courcy had often quitted Laura to attend on these excursions; and he
rejoiced when her recovered strength allowed him to gratify, without
imprudence, the inclination which brought him to Walbourne. It often,
however, required all his influence to persuade her to accompany him in
his walks with Lady Pelham. Her Ladyship's curiosity had by no means
subsided. On the contrary, it was rather exasperated by her conviction
that her niece's dejection had not been the consequence of ill health,
since it continued after that plea was removed; and Laura was constantly
tormented with oblique attempts to discover what she was determined
should never be known.

Lady Pelham's attacks were now become the more provoking, because she
could address her hints to a third person, who, not aware of their
tendency, might strengthen them by assent, or unconsciously point them
as they were intended. She contrived to make even her very looks
tormenting, by directing, upon suitable occasions, sly glances of
discovery to Laura's face; where, if they found out nothing, they at
least insinuated that there was something to find out. She was
inimitably dexterous and indefatigable in improving every occasion of
innuendo. Any subject, however irrelevant, furnished her with the
weapons of her warfare. 'Does this flower never open any further?' asked
Laura, shewing one to De Courcy--'No,' said Lady Pelham, pushing in
between them; 'that close thing, wrapped up in itself, never expands in
the genial warmth; it never shews its heart.' 'This should be a precious
book with so many envelopes,' said Laura, untying a parcel.--'More
likely,' said Lady Pelham, with a sneer, 'that what is folded in so many
doublings won't be worth looking into.' 'This day is cold for the
season,' said De Courcy, one day warming himself after his ride.
'Spring colds are the most chilling of any,' said Lady Pelham. 'They are
like a repulsive character in youth; one is not prepared for them. The
frosts of winter are more natural.'

Lady Pelham was not satisfied with using the occasions that presented
themselves; she invented others. When the weather confined her at home,
and she had nothing else to occupy her, she redoubled her industry.
'Bless me, what a sentiment!' she exclaimed, affecting surprise and
consternation, though she had read the book which contained it above
twenty times before.--'"Always live with a friend as if he might one day
become an enemy!" I can conceive nothing more detestable. A cold-hearted
suspicious wretch! Now to a friend I could not help being all open and
ingenuous but a creature capable of having such a thought, could never
have a friend.' Lady Pelham ran on for a while, contrasting her open
ingenuous self, with the odious character which her significant looks
appropriated to her niece, till even the mild Laura was provoked to
reply. Fixing her eyes upon her aunt with calm severity, 'If
Rochefoucault meant,' said she, 'that a friend should be treated with
suspicious confidence, as if he might one day betray, I agree with your
Ladyship in thinking such a sentiment incompatible with friendship; but
we are indebted to him for a useful lesson, if he merely intended to
remind us that it is easy to alienate affection without proceeding to
real injury, and very possible to forfeit esteem without incurring
serious guilt.'--The blood mounted in Lady Pelham's face, but the calm
austerity of Laura's eye imposed silence, and she continued to turn over
the pages of her book, while her niece rose and left the room. She then
tossed it away, and walked angrily up and down, fretting between baulked
curiosity and irritated pride. Finding every other mode of attack
unsuccessful, she once more resolved to have recourse to direct
interrogation. This intention had been frequently formed, and as often
defeated by the dignified reserve of Laura; but now that Lady Pelham
felt her pride concerned, she grew angry enough to be daring. It was so
provoking to be kept in awe by a mere girl, a dependent. Lady Pelham
could at any time meditate herself into a passion; she did so on the
present occasion; and accordingly resolved and executed in the same
breath. She followed Laura to her apartment, determined to insist upon
knowing what affected her spirits. Laura received her with a smile so
gracious, that, spite of herself, her wrath began to evaporate.
Conceiving it proper, however, to maintain an air of importance, she
began with an aspect that announced hostility, and a voice in which
anger increased intended gravity into surliness. 'Miss Montreville, if
you are at leisure I wish to speak with you.' 'Quite at leisure, Madam,'
said Laura in a tone of the most conciliating good humour, and motioning
her aunt to a seat by the fire. 'It is extremely unpleasant,' said Lady
Pelham, tossing her head to escape the steady look of inquiry which
Laura directed towards her; 'It is extremely unpleasant (at least if one
has any degree of sensibility) to live with persons who always seem
unhappy, and are always striving to conceal it, especially when one can
see no cause for their unhappiness.' 'It must indeed be very
distressing,' returned Laura mentally preparing for her defence. 'Then I
wonder,' said Lady Pelham, with increased acrimony of countenance, 'why
you choose to subject me to so disagreeable a situation. It is very
evident that there is something in your mind which you are either afraid
or ashamed to tell.' 'I am sorry,' said Laura, with unmoved
self-possession, 'to be the cause of any uneasiness to your Ladyship. I
do not pretend that my spirits are high, but I should not have thought
their depression unaccountable. The loss of my only parent, and such a
parent! is reason for lasting sorrow; and my own so recent escape from
the jaws of the grave, might impose seriousness upon levity itself.'--'I
have a strong notion, however, that none of these is the true cause of
your penseroso humours. Modern misses don't break their hearts for the
loss of their parents.--I remember you fainted away just when Mrs
Harrington was talking to me of Colonel Hargrave's affair; and I know he
was quartered for a whole year in your neighbourhood.'

Lady Pelham stopped to reconnoitre her niece's face, but without
success; for Laura had let fall her scissors, and was busily seeking
them on the carpet. 'Did you know him?' inquired Lady Pelham. 'I have
seen him,' answered Laura, painfully recollecting how little she had
really known him. 'Did he visit at Glenalbert?' resumed her Ladyship,
recovering her temper, as she thought she had discovered a clue to
Laura's sentiments. 'Yes, Madam, often;' replied Laura, who having, with
a strong effort, resumed her self-possession, again submitted her
countenance to inspection. 'And he was received there as a lover I
presume?' said Lady Pelham, in a tone of interrogation. Laura fixed on
her aunt one of her cool commanding glances. 'Your Ladyship,' returned
she, 'seems so much in earnest, that if the question were a little less
extraordinary, I should almost have thought you expected a serious
answer.' Lady Pelham's eyes were not comfortably placed, and she
removed them by turns to every piece of furniture in the apartment.
Speedily recovering herself, she returned to the charge. 'I think, after
the friendship I have shewn, I have some right to be treated with
confidence.' 'My dear Madam,' said Laura, gratefully pressing Lady
Pelham's hand between her own, 'believe me, I am not forgetful of the
kindness which has afforded me shelter and protection; but there are
some subjects of which no degree of intimacy will permit the discussion.
It is evident, that whatever proposals have hitherto been made to me,
have received such an answer as imposes discretion upon me. No addresses
which I accept shall ever be a secret from your Ladyship--those which I
reject I am not equally entitled to reveal.' 'By which I understand you
to say, that you have rejected Colonel Hargrave?' said Lady Pelham. 'By
no means,' answered Laura, with spirit, 'I was far from saying so. I
merely intended to express my persuasion, that you are too generous to
urge me on a sort of subject where I ought not to be communicative.'
'Very well, Miss Montreville,' cried Lady Pelham, rising in a pet, 'I
comprehend the terms on which you choose that we should live. I may have
the honour of being your companion, but I must not aspire to the rank of
a friend.' 'Indeed, my dear aunt,' said Laura, in a voice irresistibly
soothing, 'I have no earthly wish so strong as to find a real friend in
you: but,' added she, with an insinuating smile, 'I shall never earn the
treasure with tales of luckless love.' 'Well, Madam,' said Lady Pelham,
turning to quit the room, 'I shall take care for the future not to press
myself into your confidence; and as it is not the most delightful thing
in the world to live in the midst of ambuscades, I shall intrude as
little as possible on your more agreeable engagements.' 'Pray, don't
go,' said Laura with perfect good humour, and holding upon her delicate
fingers a cap which she had been making, 'I have finished your cap. Pray
have the goodness to let me try it on.' Female vanity is at least a
_sexagénaire_. Lady Pelham sent a side glance towards the cap. 'Pray
do,' said Laura, taking her hand, and coaxingly pulling her back. 'Make
haste then,' said Lady Pelham, sullenly, 'for I have no time to spare.'
'How becoming,' cried Laura, as she fixed on the cap, 'I never saw you
look so well in any thing. Look at it;' and she held a looking-glass to
her aunt. The ill humour which had resisted the graces of the loveliest
face in the world, could not stand a favourable view of her own; and
Lady Pelham quitted Laura with a gracious compliment to her genius for
millinery, and a declaration, that the cap should be worn the next day,
in honour of a visit from Mr De Courcy and Harriet.

The next day the expected guests dined at Walbourne. As Harriet had just
returned from her excursion, this was the first time that she had seen
Laura, and the meeting gave them mutual pleasure. Harriet seemed in even
more than usual spirits; and Laura, roused by the presence of persons
whom she loved and respected, shewed a cheerfulness more unconstrained
than she had felt since her father's death. Montague, who watched her
assiduously, was enchanted to perceive that she could once more smile
without effort; and, in the joy of his heart, resumed a gaiety which had
of late been foreign to him. But the life of the party was Lady Pelham;
for who could be so delightful, so extravagantly entertaining as Lady
Pelham could be when she pleased? And she did please this afternoon; for
a train of fortunate circumstances had put her into high good humour.
She not only wore the becoming cap; but had hit, without difficulty, the
most becoming mode of putting it on. The cook had done her office in a
manner altogether faultless; and the gardener had brought in such a
sallad! its like had never been seen in the county.

Miss De Courcy was extremely anxious that Laura should pass a few days
at Norwood. But Laura, remembering the coolness which had of late
subsisted between herself and Lady Pelham, and unwilling to postpone her
endeavours to efface every trace of it, objected that she could not quit
her aunt for such a length of time. Harriet immediately proposed to
invite Lady Pelham.--'I'll set about it this instant, while she's in the
vein,' said she. 'This sunshine is too bright to last.' Laura looked
very grave, and Harriet hastened to execute her purpose. There is no
weakness of their neighbours which mankind so instinctively convert to
their own use as vanity. Except to secure Laura's company, Harriet had
not the slightest desire for Lady Pelham's. Yet she did not even name
her friend while she pressed Lady Pelham so earnestly to visit Norwood,
that she succeeded to her wish, and obtained a promise that the ladies
should accompany her and her brother home on the following day.

When at the close of an agreeable evening, Laura attended her friend to
her chamber, Harriet, with more sincerity than politeness, regretted
that Lady Pelham was to join their party to Norwood. 'I wish the old
lady would have allowed you to go without her,' said she. 'She'll
interrupt a thousand things I had to say to you. However, my mother can
keep her in conversation. She'll be so delighted to see you, that she'll
pay the penalty without a grudge.' 'I shall feel the more indebted to
your mother's welcome,' said Laura, with extreme gravity, 'because she
will extend it to a person to whom I owe obligations that cannot be
repaid.' Harriet, blushing, apologized for her freedom; and Laura
accepting the apology with smiles of courtesy and affection, the friends
separated for the night.




CHAPTER XXII


Norwood had appeared to Laura to be little more than a mile distant from
Walbourne. The swellings of the ground had deceived her. It was more
than twice that distance. As the carriage approached Norwood, Laura
perceived traces of a noble park, changed from its former purpose to one
more useful, though less magnificent. The corn fields were intermixed by
venerable avenues, and studded with gigantic elm and oak. Through one of
these avenues, straight as a dart, and darkened by the woods that closed
over it, the party drove up to a massive gate. In the door of a turreted
lodge, overgrown with hornbeam, stood the grey-haired porter, waiting
their arrival. He threw open the gate with one hand, and respectfully
stood with his hat in the other, while De Courcy checked his horse to
inquire for the old man's family.

The avenue now quitted its formality, to wind along the bank of a rapid
stream, till the woods suddenly opening to the right, discovered the
lawn, green as an emerald, and kept with a neatness truly English. A
variety of flowering shrubs were scattered over it, and here and there a
lofty forest-tree threw its quivering shadow; while tall spruce-firs,
their branches descending to the ground, formed a contrast to its
verdure. At the extremity of this lawn stood Norwood, a large
castellated building; and, while Laura looked on it, she imagined the
interior dull with baronial magnificence.

The carriage drove up to the door, and Laura could not helping smiling
at the cordial welcome that seemed to await De Courcy. The great
Newfoundland dog that lay upon the steps leapt upon him, and expressed
his joy by a hundred clumsy gambols; while John, the old servant whom
she had seen in Audley Street, busied himself about his master, with an
officiousness that evidently came from the heart, leaving Lady Pelham's
attendants to wait upon their mistress and her companions. De Courcy,
giving his hand to Lady Pelham, conducted her, followed by Harriet and
Laura, into the room where Mrs De Courcy was sitting; and the next
moment his heart throbbed with pleasure, while he saw the beloved of his
soul locked in his mother's arms.

When the first joy of the meeting was over, Laura had leisure to observe
the interior of the mansion, which differed not less from her
expectations than from any thing she had before seen. Though it was
equally remote from the humble simplicity of her cottage of Glenalbert,
and the gaudiness of Lady Pelham's more modern abode, she saw nothing of
the gloomy splendour which she had fancied; every thing breathed comfort
and repose. The furniture, though not without magnificence, was
unadorned and substantial, grandeur holding the second place to
usefulness. The marble hall through which she had entered, was almost
covered with matting. In the spacious room in which she was sitting, the
little Turkey carpet of our forefathers had given place to one of
homelier grain but far larger dimensions. The apartment was liberally
stored with couches, footstools, and elbow chairs. A harp occupied one
window, a piano-forte stood near it; many books were scattered about, in
bindings which shewed they were not meant for ornament: and in the
chimney blazed a fire which would have done credit to the days of
Elizabeth.

The dinner hour was four; and punctual to a moment the dinner appeared,
plain, neat, and substantial. It was served without tumult, partaken of
with appetite, and enlivened by general hilarity, and good will. When
the ladies rose from table, Harriet offered to conduct Laura through the
other apartments, which exactly corresponded with those she had seen.
The library was spacious; and besides an excellent collection of books,
contained globes, astronomical instruments, and cabinets of minerals and
coins. A smaller room which opened from it, used as De Courcy's
laboratory, was filled with chemical and mechanical apparatus. Comfort,
neatness, and peace reigned everywhere, and Norwood seemed a fit retreat
for literary leisure and easy hospitality.

Between music, work, and conversation, the evening passed away
cheerfully; nor did Laura mark its flight till the great house clock
struck nine. The conversation suddenly paused; Harriet laid aside her
work; Mrs De Courcy's countenance assumed a pleasing seriousness; and
Montague, quitting his place by Laura's side, seated himself in a
patriarchal-looking chair at the upper end of the room. Presently John
entered, followed by all the domestics of the family. He placed before
his master a reading desk and a large bible, and then sat down at a
distance with his fellow servants.

With a manner serious and earnest, as one impressed with a just sense of
their importance, Montague read a portion of the Holy Scriptures. He
closed the volume; and all present sunk upon their knees. In plain but
solemn language, he offered a petition in the name of all, that all
might be endowed with the graces of the Christian spirit. In the name of
all he confessed that they were unworthy of the blessings they implored.
In the name of all, he gave thanks for the means of improvement, and for
the hopes of glory. He next, more particularly, besought a blessing on
the circumstances of their several conditions. Among the joyous faces of
this happy household, Laura had observed one alone clouded with sorrow.
It was that of a young modest-looking girl in deep mourning, whose
audible sobs attested that she was the subject of a prayer which
commended an orphan to the Father of the fatherless. The worship was
closed; the servants withdrew. A silence of a few moments ensued; and
Laura could not help gazing with delight, not unmingled with awe, on the
traces of serene benevolence and manly piety, which lingered on the
countenance of De Courcy.

'Happy Harriet,' said she, when she was alone with her friend, 'Would
that I had been your sister!' Harriet laughed. 'You need not laugh, my
dear,' continued Laura, with most unembarrassed simplicity, 'I did not
mean your brother's wife, but his sister, and Mrs De Courcy's daughter.'

Though Miss De Courcy was much less in Montague's confidence than her
mother, she was not ignorant of his preference for Laura; but Mrs De
Courcy had so strongly cautioned her against even hinting this
preference to the object of it, that, though she but half guessed the
reasons of her mother's injunction, she was afraid to disobey. That
Laura was even acquainted with Hargrave was unknown to Harriet; for De
Courcy was almost as tenacious of Laura's secret as she herself was, and
would as soon have thought of giving up his own heart to the frolics of
a kitten, as of exposing that of Laura to the _badinage_ of his sister.
This kind precaution left Laura perfectly at her ease with Harriet, an
ease which would quickly have vanished, had she known her to be
acquainted with her humiliating story.

The young ladies had rambled over half the grounds of Norwood before the
family had assembled at a cheerful breakfast; and as soon as it was
ended, Harriet proposed that Laura should assist her with her advice in
composing a water-colour drawing from one of her own pictures. 'We'll
leave Lady Pelham and my mother in possession of the drawing-room,' said
she, 'for the pictures all hang in the library. I wanted them put up in
the sitting-room, but Montague would have them where they are--and so he
carried his point, for mamma humours him in everything.' 'Perhaps,'
returned Laura, 'Mrs De Courcy thinks that he has some right to dictate
in his own house.' 'Well, that's true,' cried Harriet. 'I protest I had
forgotten that this house was not my mother's.'

The picture which Miss De Courcy had fixed upon, was that of Leonidas,
and Laura would far rather have been excused from interference; yet, as
she could not with propriety escape, nothing remained but to summon her
composure, and to study anew this resemblance of her unworthy lover. She
took her work, and began quietly to superintend Harriet's progress.
Their employments did not interrupt conversation; and though Laura's was
at first a little embarrassed, she soon recovered her ease. 'Do touch
the outline of the mouth for me,' said Harriet; 'I can't hit the
resemblance at all.' Laura excused herself, saying, that since her
fever, her hand had been unsteady. 'Oh, here's Montague; he'll do it.
Come hither Montague, and sketch a much prettier mouth than your own.'
De Courcy, who had approached his sister before he understood her
request, shrunk back. She could scarcely have proposed an employment
less agreeable to him; and he was hastily going to refuse it, when,
happening to meet the eye of Laura, in the dread that she should detect
his consciousness, he snatched the pencil and began.

Harriet having thus transferred her work, quickly found out other
occupation. 'Oh, by the by, my dear,' said she to Laura, 'your Leonidas
is the greatest likeness in the world of my old beau, Colonel Hargrave.
Bless me, how she blushes! Ah! I see Hargrave has not been so long in
Scotland for nothing!' 'Take away that thing, Harriet,' cried De Courcy,
quite thrown off his guard, and pushing the drawing from him. 'I see no
reason why _everybody_ should do for you what you ought to be doing for
yourself.' 'Hey-day, what ails the man,' cried Harriet, looking after
her brother to the window, whither he had retreated. 'You need not be so
angry at me for making Laura blush. I dare say she likes it; it becomes
her so well.' 'If you are accustomed to say such strange things to your
friends, my dear Harriet,' said Laura, 'the blushes you raise will not
always have that advantage. The colourings of anger are not generally
becoming.' 'So, with that meek face of yours, you would have me believe
that it is downright rage that has made you all scarlet. No, no, my
dear--there is rage, and there is the colour of it, too, (pointing to
Montague's face); and if you'll put your two heads together before the
glass, you will see whether the colours are a bit alike!' Montague,
recovering his temper, tried to laugh, and succeeded very ill. 'I don't
wonder you laugh,' said Laura, not venturing to look round to him, 'at
hearing Harriet, on such slender grounds, exalt such a matter-of-fact
person as myself, into the heroine of a romance. But, to spare your
imagination, Harriet, I will tell you, that your old beau, as you call
him, being the handsomest man I had seen, I saw no harm in making use of
his beauty in my picture.' 'Well, I protest,' cried Harriet, 'it was
quite by accident I thought of mentioning it, for I had not the least
idea that ever you had seen Hargrave.' 'And, now that you have made that
mighty discovery,' said De Courcy, endeavouring to appear unconcerned,
'I suppose you'll poison Miss Montreville; for you know you were so in
love with Hargrave, that I was obliged to put a rail round the fish-pond
to prevent _felo de se_.' 'In love,' said Harriet, yawning, 'ay, so I
was indeed, for three whole days when I had nothing else to do. But only
think of the sly girl never even to name him to me! Well! well! I shall
worm it all out of her when we are by ourselves, though she won't blab
before you.' 'I will give you an opportunity this moment,' said De
Courcy, who, quite unable to bear the subject any longer, determined to
make his mother interrupt it, and immediately went in search of her. In
a few minutes Mrs De Courcy appeared, and dismissed her unwilling
daughter to escort Lady Pelham to the flower-garden, while Laura
preferred remaining at home.

At the next opportunity, Harriet executed her threat, in so far as
depended upon her. She did what she could to rally Laura out of her
secret, but she totally failed of success. Laura, now upon her guard,
not only evaded making any discovery, but, by the easy indifference of
her answers, convinced Harriet that there was nothing to discover.
Indeed, her suspicion was merely a transient thought, arising from
Laura's confusion at her sudden attack, and scarcely outlived the moment
that gave it birth; though the emotion which Montague had shewn,
confirmed his sister in the belief of his attachment to Laura.

The subject thus entirely dropped which Laura could never approach
without pain, the time of her visit to Norwood glided away in peace and
comfort, every day lessening the dejection which she had believed, nay
almost wished, would follow her to the grave. Still, however, the traces
of it were sufficiently visible to the observant eye of love; and
Montague found in it an interest not to be awakened by the brightest
flashes of gaiety. 'There is a charm inexpressible in her sadness,' said
he to Mrs De Courcy. 'I think,' said Mrs De Courcy, 'I can observe that
that charm is decaying. I think, if it should entirely disappear before
your fates are more closely united, you need not lament its departure.
These cypresses look graceful bending over the urn there in the vista,
but I should not like them to darken the sitting-room.'

The only habit, common to love-lorn damsels, in which Laura indulged,
was that of preferring solitary rambles; a habit, however, which had
been imbibed long before she had any title to that character. Delighted
with the environs of Norwood, she sometimes wandered beyond the dressed
ground into the park, where art still embellished without restraining
nature. The park might, indeed, have better deserved the name of an
ornamented farm; for the lawns were here and there diversified by
cornfields, and enlivened by the habitations of the labourers necessary
to the agriculturist. These cottages, banished by fashion far from every
lordly residence, were contrived so as to unite beauty with usefulness;
they gave added interest to the landscape even to the eye of a stranger,
but far more to that of De Courcy, for he knew that every one of them
contained useful hands or graceful hearts; youth for whom he provided
employment, or age whose past services he repaid. Here the blue smoke
curled from amidst the thicket; there the white wall enlivened the
meadow; here the casement flashed bright with the setting sun; there the
woodbine and the creeping rose softened the colouring that would have
glared on the eye.

Laura had followed the windings of a little green lane, till the woods
which darkened it suddenly opened into a small field, sheltered by them
on every side, which seemed to form the territory of a cottage of
singular neatness and beauty. In a porch covered with honeysuckle, which
led through a flower-garden to the house, a lovely little boy about
three years old was playing with De Courcy's great Newfoundland dog. The
child was stretching on tiptoe to hug with one arm the neck of his
rough companion; while, with the other hand, he was playfully offering
the animal a bit of bread, and then snatching it in sport away. Neptune,
not used to be so tantalized, made a catch at his prey; but the child
succeeded in preserving his prize, and, laughing, hid it behind him. The
next moment Laura saw the dog throw him down, and heard a piercing cry.
Fearless of personal danger, she ran to his assistance. The child was
lying motionless on his face; while, with one huge paw laid on his back,
Neptune was standing over him, wagging his tail in triumph. Convinced
that the child was unhurt, and that the scream had been caused merely by
fear, Laura spoke to the dog, who immediately quitted his posture to
fawn upon her. She lifted the child from the ground and carried him
towards the cottage. The poor little fellow, pale with terror, clung
round her neck; but he no sooner saw himself in safety, than, recovering
his suspended faculties, he began to roar with all his might. His cries
reached the people in the house, who hastened to inquire into their
cause; and Laura was met in the door of the cottage by De Courcy's
grey-haired servant, John, who seemed its owner, and a decent old woman,
who was his wife.

Laura prefaced her account of the accident by an assurance that the
child was not hurt, and the old woman, taking him in her arms, tried to
sooth him, while John invited Miss Montreville to enter. She followed
him into a room, which, unacquainted as she was with the cleanliness of
the English cottages, appeared to her quite Arcadian. While Margaret was
busy with her little charge, Laura praised the neatness and comfort of
John's abode. 'It is as snug a place as heart can desire, please you,
Ma'am,' answered John, visibly gratified; 'and we have every thing here
as convenient as in the king's palace, or as my master himself has, for
the matter of that.' 'I thought, John, you had lived in Mr De Courcy's
house,' said Laura. 'Yes, please you, Ma'am, and so I did, since I was a
little fellow no higher than my knee, taken in to run messages, till my
young master came of age, and then he built this house for me, that I
might just have it to go to when I pleased, without being turned away
like; for he knew old folks liked to have a home of their own. So now,
of a fine evening, I come home after prayers, and stay all night; and
when it's bad weather, I have the same bed as I have had these forty
years; not a penny worse than my master's own.' 'And if you are employed
all day at Norwood,' said Laura, 'how do you contrive to keep your
garden in such nice order?' 'Oh! for the matter of that, Ma'am, my
master would not grudge me a day's work of the under gardener any time;
no, nor to pay a man to work the little patch for me; but only, as he
says, the sweetest flowers are of one's own planting, so, of a fine day
he often sends me home for an hour or two in the cool, just to put the
little place in order.' 'Mr De Courcy seems attentive to the comfort of
every body that comes near him,' said Laura. 'That he is, Madam; one
would think he had an affection, like, for every mortal creature, and
particularly when they grow old and useless, like me and Margaret. I
know who offered him twenty pounds a-year for this house and the bit of
field; but he said old folks did not like moving, and he would not put
us out of this, even though he could give us one twice as good.' 'And
your rent is lower than twenty pounds, I suppose?' said Laura. 'Why
sure, Ma'am, we never pay a penny for it. My master,' said John, drawing
up his head, and advancing his chest, 'my master has the proper true
spirit of a gentleman, and he had it since ever he was born; for it's
bred in the bone with him, as the saying is. Why, Ma'am, he had it from
a child.--I have seen him, when he was less than that boy there, give
away his dinner when he was as hungry as a hound, just because a beggar
asked it.--Ay, I remember, one day, just two-and-twenty years ago come
July, that he was sitting at the door on my knee, eating his breakfast,
and he had asked it half a dozen times from Mrs Martin, for he was very
hungry; and she did not always attend to him very well. So, up came a
woman leading a little ragged creature; and it looked at Master
Montague's bread and milk, and said, 'I wish I had some too.' So, says
my master, "here take you some, and I'll take what you leave."--Well,
Ma'am, the brat snapped it up all in a trice, and I waited to see what
little master would do.--Well, he just laughed as good naturedly! Then I
was going to have got him another breakfast, but my Lady would not let
me. "No, No, John!" said my Lady, "we must teach Montague the connection
between generosity and self-denial."--These were my Lady's very words.'

By this time Margaret had succeeded in quieting the child; and a double
allowance of bread and butter restored all his gaiety. 'Come, Nep,' said
he, squatting himself on the ground where Neptune was lying at Laura's
feet; 'come, Nep, I'll make friends; and there's half for you, Henry's
own dear Nep.' 'Will you sit upon my knee?' said Laura, who was
extremely fond of children. The boy looked steadily in her face for a
few moments, and then holding out his arms to her, said, 'Yes, I will.'
'Whose charming child is this?' inquired Laura, twisting his golden
ringlets round her fingers. The colour rose to old Margaret's furrowed
cheek as she answered, 'He is an orphan, Ma'am.'--'He is our grandson,'
said John, and drew his hand across his eyes. Laura saw that the subject
was painful, and she inquired no further. She remained for a while
playing with little Henry, and listening to John's praises of his
master; and then returned homewards.

She was met by De Courcy and Harriet, who were coming in search of her.
She related her little adventure, and praised the extraordinary beauty
of the child. 'Oh, that's Montague's protegé!' cried Harriet. 'By the by
he has not been to visit us since you came; I believe he was never so
long absent before since he could see. I have a great notion my brother
did not want to produce him to you.'--'To me!' exclaimed Laura in
surprise; 'Why not?' But receiving no answer from Harriet, who had been
effectually silenced by a look from De Courcy, she turned for
explanation to Montague; who made an awkward attempt to laugh off his
sister's attack, and then as awkwardly changed the subject.

For some minutes Laura gravely and silently endeavoured to account for
his behaviour. 'His generosity supports this child,' thought she, 'and
he is superior to blazoning his charity.' So having, as great
philosophers have done, explained the facts to agree with her theory,
she was perfectly satisfied, and examined them no more. Association
carrying her thoughts to the contemplation of the happiness which De
Courcy seemed to diffuse through every circle where he moved, she
regretted that she was so soon to exchange the enjoyment of equable
unobtrusive kindness, for starts of officious fondness mingling with
intervals of cold neglect or peevish importunity.

'Norwood is the Eden of the earth,' said she to Harriet, as they drew
their chairs towards the fire, to enjoy a _tête à tête_ after the family
were retired for the night; 'and it is peopled with spirits fit for
paradise.--Happy you, who need never think of leaving it!' 'Bless you,
my dear,' cried Harriet, 'there is nothing I think of half so much.--You
would not have me be an old maid to comb lapdogs and fatten cats, when I
might be scolding my own maids and whipping my own children.' 'Really,'
said Laura, 'I think you would purchase even _these_ delightful
recreations too dearly by the loss of your present society. Sure it were
a mad venture to change such a blessing for any uncertainty!' 'And yet,
Mrs Graveairs, I have a notion that a certain gallant soldier could
inspire you with the needful daring.--Now, look me in the face, and deny
it if you can.' Laura did as she was desired; and, with cheeks flushed
to crimson, but a voice of sweet austere composure, replied, 'Indeed,
Miss De Courcy, I am hurt that you should so often have taxed me, even
in sport, with so discreditable a partiality. You cannot be serious in
supposing that I would marry an'--adulterer, Laura would have said; but
to apply such an epithet to Hargrave was too much for human firmness,
and she stopped. 'I declare she is angry,' cried Harriet. 'Well, my
dear, since it displeases you, I shan't tease you any more; at least not
till I find a new subject. But, pray now, do you intend to practise as
you preach. Have you made a vow never to marry?' 'I do not say so,'
answered Laura; 'it is silly to assert resolutions which nobody credits.
Besides my situation sadly differs from yours. Like the moon, that is
rising yonder, I must pursue my course alone. Thousands around me might
perhaps warm and enlighten me; but far distant, their influence is lost
ere it reaches me. You are in the midst of a happy family, endeared to
you by all that is lovely in virtue; all that is sacred in kindred.--I
know not what would tempt me to resign your situation.'--'What would
tempt you?' cried Harriet. 'Why a pretty fellow would. But I verily
believe you have been taking your cue from Montague; these are precisely
his ideas. I think he has set his heart upon making me lead apes.' 'What
makes you think so?' inquired Laura. 'Because he finds out a hundred
faults to every man that talks nonsense to me. One is poor; and he
thinks it folly to marry a beggar. Another is old, though he's rich; and
that would be downrightly selling myself. One's a fool, and t'other's
cross; and in short there's no end to his freaks. Only the other day he
made me dismiss a creature that I believe I should have liked well
enough in time. I have not half forgiven him for it yet. Poor
Wilmot--and I should have had a nice barouche too!' 'What could possibly
weigh with your brother against the barouche?' said Laura, smiling.
'Why, my dear, the saucy wretch told me, as plainly as he civilly could,
that Wilmot and I had not a grain of prudence between us; ergo, that we
should be ridiculous and miserable. Besides, poor Wilmot once persuaded
a pretty girl to play the fool; and though he afterwards did every thing
he could to prevail on her to be made an honest woman, the silly thing
chose rather to break her heart and die; and, ever since, poor Wilmot
has been subject to fits of low spirits.' 'Is it possible, Harriet, that
you can talk so lightly of a crime so black in its nature, so dreadful
in its consequences: Can it seem a trifle to you to destroy the peace,
the innocence of a fellow-creature? Can you smile at remorse that
pursued its victim even to the grave?' Tears filled the eyes of Harriet.
'Oh no, my dearest,' she cried, throwing her arms round Laura's neck;
'do not think so hardly of me.--I am a rattle, it is true, but I am not
unprincipled.'--'Pardon my injustice, dearest Harriet,' said Laura, 'in
believing, even for a moment, that you were capable of such perversion;
and join with me in rejoicing that your brother's influence has saved
you from witnessing, from sharing, the pangs of unavailing repentance.'
'Indeed,' said Harriet, 'Montague's influence can do any thing with me;
and no wonder. I should be the most ungrateful wretch on earth if I
could oppose his wishes. I cannot tell you the thousandth part of the
affection he has shewn me. Did you ever hear, my dear, that my father
had it not in his power to make any provision for me?' Laura answered
that she had never heard the circumstances of the family at all
mentioned. 'Do you know,' continued Harriet, 'I am certain that Montague
is averse to my marrying, because he is afraid that my poverty, and not
my will, consents. But he has himself set that matter to rest; for the
very morning after I gave Wilmot his _congé_, Montague presented me with
bills for two thousand pounds. The generous fellow told me that he did
not offer his gift while Wilmot's suit was pending, lest I should think
he bought a right to influence my decision.' 'This is just what I should
have expected from Mr De Courcy,' said Laura, the purest satisfaction
beaming in her countenance. 'He is ever considerate, ever generous.' 'To
tell you that he gives me money,' cried Harriet, rapturously, 'is
nothing; he gives me his time, his labour, his affection. Do love him,
dear Laura! He is the best of all creatures!' 'Indeed I believe it,'
said Laura, 'and I have the most cordial regard for him.'--'Ah but you
must'--Harriet's gratitude to her brother had very nearly been too
strong for his secret, and she was on the point of petitioning Laura to
return a sentiment warmer than cordial regard, when, recollecting her
mother's commands, she desisted; and to fly from the temptation, wished
Laura good night, and retired.

It was with sincere regret that Laura, the next day, took leave of her
kind hosts. As De Courcy handed her into the carriage, the tears were
rising to her eyes: but they were checked by a glance from Lady Pelham,
in which Laura thought she could read mingled scorn and anger. Lady
Pelham had remarked the improved spirits of her niece; but, instead of
rejoicing that any medicine should have 'ministered to a mind diseased,'
she was offended at the success of a remedy applied by any other than
herself. She was nettled at perceiving that the unobtrusive seriousness
of Mrs De Courcy, and the rattling gaiety of Harriet, had effected what
all her brilliant powers had not achieved. Her powers, indeed, had been
sometimes directed to entertain, but never to console; they had been
exerted to purchase admiration, not to win confidence; yet, with a
common perverseness, she was angry at their ill success, not sorry for
their wrong direction. She did not consider, that real benevolence, or
an excellent counterfeit, is the only road to an unadulterated heart. It
appeared to her a proof of an ungrateful temper in her niece, that she
should yield in so short a time to strangers to whom she owed nothing,
what she refused to a relation to whom she owed so much. She had been
unable to forbear from venting her spleen in little spiteful remarks,
and sly stings, sometimes so adroitly given, that they were unobserved,
except by the person who was by degrees becoming accustomed to expect
them. The presence of the De Courcy family, however, restrained the
expression of Lady Pelham's ill humour; and, as she detested restraint,
(a detestation which she always ascribed to a noble ingenuousness of
mind), she nestled, with peculiar complacency, into the corner of the
carriage which was to convey her to what she called freedom, namely, the
liberty to infringe, with impunity, the rights of others. Laura felt
that her reluctance to quit Norwood was a bad compliment to her aunt,
and she called a smile to her face as she kissed her hand to her kind
friends; yet the contrast between their affectionate looks, and the
'lurking devil' in Lady Pelham's eye, did not lessen her regret at the
exchange she was making.

Lady Pelham saw the tone of Laura's mind, and she immediately struck up
a discord. 'Heaven be praised,' she cried, 'we have at last escaped out
of that stupid place! I think it must be something extraordinary that
tempts me to spend four days there again.' Laura remained silent; for
she disliked direct contradiction, and never spoke what she did not
think. Lady Pelham continued her harangue, declaring, 'that your good
sort of people were always intolerably tiresome; that clock-work
regularity was the dullest thing in nature; that Norwood was another
cave of Trophonius; Mrs De Courcy inspired with the soul of a starched
old maid; Harriet animated by the joint spirit of a magpie and a monkey;
and Montague by that of a methodist parson.' Finally, she again
congratulated herself on her escape from such society, and wondered how
any body could submit to it without hanging himself. Laura was
accustomed to support Lady Pelham's attacks upon herself with perfect
equanimity; but her temper was not proof against this unjust, this
unexpected philippic against her friends; and she reddened with anger
and disdain, though she had still so much self-command as to reply only,
'Your Ladyship is fortunate in being able to lose, without regret, what
_others_ find it so difficult to replace.'

Lady Pelham fully understood the emphasis which was laid on the word
_others_, but the mortification to her vanity was compensated by the
triumph of discovering the vulnerable side of her niece's temper. This
was the first time that she had been conscious of power over it, and
severely did Laura pay for the momentary negligence which had betrayed
the secret. Some persons never feel pleasure without endeavouring to
communicate it. Lady Pelham acted upon the converse of this amiable
principle; and, as an ill-regulated mind furnished constant sources of
pain, a new channel of participation was a precious discovery. As often,
therefore, as spleen, jealousy, or malice prompted her to annoyance, she
had recourse henceforth to this new-found weapon; and she varied her
warfare through all the changes of hints, insinuations, and that mode of
attack the most provoking of all, which, aiming at no particular point,
becomes the more difficult to parry. During several months, she made it
the occasional instrument of her vengeance for the jealousy which she
entertained of Laura's increasing intimacy with the De Courcys; an
intimacy which she chose to embitter, though she could not break it off,
without depriving herself of acquaintances who were visited by the first
people in the county.

Her industry in teazing was not confined to Laura. She inflicted a
double stroke, by the petulance or coldness with which she sometimes
treated the De Courcys. But though Laura was keenly sensible to these
petty wrongs done her friends, the injury passed them over without much
notice. Harriet repaid them with laughter or sarcasm; while Montague
seemed to consider them as wholly unworthy of attention. He continued
his visits to Walbourne, and accident at last furnished an excuse for
their frequency.

In the course of Lady Pelham's improvements, a difficulty chanced to
occur, which a slight knowledge of the elements of mathematics would
have enabled her to solve. To supply the want of this knowledge, she had
recourse to Mr De Courcy, who removed her perplexity with the ease of
one conversant with his subject, and the accuracy of one who speaks to a
reasoning creature. Lady Pelham was charmed! She was convinced that 'of
all studies that of mathematics must be the most delightful. She
imagined it might not be quite impracticable even for a lady, supposing
she were so fortunate as to meet with a friend who could assist her.' De
Courcy, laughing, offered his services, not, it must be owned, with any
idea that they would be accepted. Her Ladyship, however, eagerly
embraced the offer; for she was little accustomed to forecast the
difficulties of any scheme that entered her brain. In this triumphant
expectation that all difficulty would yield to her acuteness, and her
brighter abilities gain in a comparison with the plain good-sense of her
niece, she obliged Laura to join her in this new pursuit. Upon the study
of this science, so little in favour with a sex who reserve cultivation
for faculties where it is least wanting, Laura entered with a pleasure
that surprised herself, and she persevered in it with an industry that
astonished her teacher. Lady Pelham was, for a little while, the
companion of her labours; but, at the first difficulty, she took offence
at the unaccommodating thing, which shewed no more indulgence to female
than to royal indolence.--Forthwith she was fired with a strong aversion
to philosophers in bibs, and a horror at she-pedants, a term of reproach
which a dexterous side-glance could appropriate to her niece, though the
author of those memoirs challenges any mortal to say that ever Laura
Montreville was heard to mention ellipse or parabola, or to insinuate
her acquaintance with the properties of circle or polygon. Nothing moved
by Lady Pelham's sneers, Laura continued her studies, impelled partly by
the duty of improving the most valuable faculty of an immortal mind,
partly by the pleasure which she derived from the study itself. It is
true, that her Ladyship's indiscreet use of the secret, made Laura's
labours the cause of much merriment to titterers of both sexes; but we
have never discovered that De Courcy esteemed her the less for her
persevering industry, or loved her the less for this new subject of
mutual interest. He watched with delight the restoration of her mind to
its full vigour; and as he had never known her in the blaze of youthful
gaiety, he was scarcely sensible of the shade which blended the radiance
of her mid-day of life with the sober tints of evening.

The impression of her early disappointment was indeed indelible, but it
was no longer overwhelming. She had given the reins to her
imagination--it had fatally misled her; but its power had sustained an
irrecoverable shock, and the sway was transferred to reason. She had
dreamed of an earthly heaven, and seen that it was but a dream. All her
earthly joys had vanished--yet misery had been almost as transient as
delight, and she learned the practical use of a truth which all
acknowledge in theory. In the course of four months residence at
Walbourne, she recovered a placid cheerfulness, which afterwards
continued to be the habitual tenor of her mind. If she looked forward to
the future events of her life, it was to resolve that they should be
subservient to the great end of her being. If she glanced backward, it
was less to lament her disappointment, than to blame the error which had
led to it; and she never allowed her thoughts to dwell upon her unworthy
lover, except when praying that he might be awakened to a sense of his
guilt.

She was chiefly concerned to improve and to enjoy the present; and in
this she was successful in spite of the peevish humours of Lady Pelham,
mixed occasionally with ebullitions of rage. Those who are furious where
they dare, or when the provocation is sufficient to rouse their courage,
sometimes chide with impotent perseverance where they are awed from the
full expression of their fury: as the sea, which the lightest breeze
dashes in billows over the sandbank, frets in puny ripples against the
rock that frowns over it. If Lady Pelham's temper had any resemblance to
this stormy element, it was not wholly void of likeness to another--for
it 'changed as it listed,' without any discoverable reason. It would
have lost half its power to provoke, and Laura half the merit of her
patient endurance, if it had been permanently diabolical. The current,
not only serene but sparkling, would reflect with added beauty every
surrounding object, then would suddenly burst into foam, or settle into
a stagnant marsh. Laura threw oil upon the torrent, and suffered the
marsh to clear itself. She enjoyed Lady Pelham's wit and vivacity in her
hours of good humour, and patiently submitted to her seasons of low
spirits, as she complaisantly called them.

Laura at last, undesignedly, opened a new direction to her aunt's
spleen. From her first introduction to Lady Pelham, she had laboured
assiduously to promote a reconciliation between her aunt and her
daughter, Mrs Herbert. Her zeal appeared surprising to Lady Pelham, who
could not estimate the force of her motive for thus labouring, to the
manifest detriment of her own interest, she being (after Mrs Herbert)
the natural heiress of her aunt's fortune. She had seized the moment of
complacency; watched the relentings of nature; by turns tried to sooth
and to convince; and, in the proper spirit of a peace-maker, adhered to
her purpose with meek perseverance. According to the humour of the
hour, Lady Pelham was alternately flattered by solicitations that
confessed her power, or rendered peevish by entreaties which she was
determined to reject, or fired to rage by the recollection of her
wrongs. If the more placid frame prevailed, she could ring eternal
changes on the same oft-refuted arguments, or adroitly shift the subject
by some lively sally of wit, or some neat compliment to her niece. In
her more stormy tempers, she would profess a total inability to pardon;
nay, a determination never to attempt it; and took credit for scorning
to pretend a forgiveness which she could not practise.

Still Laura was not discouraged: for she had often observed that what
Lady Pelham declared on one day to be wholly impossible, on the next
became, without any assignable reason, the easiest thing in nature; and
that what to-day no human force could wrest from her, was yielded
to-morrow to no force at all. She therefore persisted in her work of
conciliation; and her efforts at last prevailed so far, that, though
Lady Pelham still protested implacability, she acknowledged, that, as
there was no necessity for her family feuds being known to the world,
she was willing to appear upon decent terms with the Herberts; and, for
that purpose, would receive them for a few weeks at Walbourne.

Of this opening, unpromising as it was, Laura instantly availed herself;
and wrote to convey the frozen invitation to her cousin, in the kindest
language which she was permitted to use. It was instantly accepted; and
Mrs Herbert and her husband became the inmates of Walbourne.

Mrs Herbert had no resemblance to her mother. Her countenance was grave
and thoughtful; her manners uniformly cold and repulsive. Laura traced
in her unbending reserve, the apathy of one whose genial feelings had
been blunted by early unkindness. Frank, high-spirited, and imprudent,
Herbert was his wife's opposite; and Laura had not been half an hour in
his company, before she began to tremble for the effects of these
qualities on the irascible temper of her aunt. But her alarm seemed
causeless; for the easy resoluteness with which he maintained his
opinions, appeared to extort from Lady Pelham a sort of respect; and,
though she privately complained to Laura of what she called his
assurance, she exempted him, while present, from her attacks, seeming
afraid to exert upon him her skill in provoking. Laura began to
perceive, that a termagant is not so untameable an animal as she had
once imagined, since one glimpse of the master-spirit is of sovereign
power to lay the lesser imps of spleen. But though Lady Pelham seemed
afraid to measure her strength with spirits of kindred irascibility, she
was under no restraint with Mrs Herbert, upon whom she vented a degree
of querulousness that appeared less like the ebullitions of ill-temper,
than the overflowings of settled malice. Every motion, every look,
furnished matter of censure or of sarcasm. The placing of a book, the
pronunciation of a word, the snuffing of a candle, called forth
reprehension; and Laura knew not whether to be most astonished at the
ingenious malice which contrived to convert 'trifles light as air,' into
certain proofs of degeneracy, or at the apathy on which the venomed
shaft fell harmless. Mrs Herbert received all her mother's reprimands in
silence, without moving a muscle, without announcing, by the slightest
change of colour, that the sarcasm had reached further than her ear. If,
as not unfrequently happened, the reproof extended into a harangue, Mrs
Herbert unmoved withdrew no part of her attention from her netting, but
politely suppressed a yawn.

These discourteous scenes were exhibited only in Mr Herbert's absence;
his presence instantly suspended Lady Pelham's warfare; and Laura
inferred that his wife never made him acquainted with her mother's
behaviour. That behaviour formed an exception to the general
unsteadiness of Lady Pelham; for to Mrs Herbert she was consistently
cruel and insulting. Nothing could be more tormenting to the benevolent
mind of Laura, than to witness this system of aggression; and she
repented having been instrumental in renewing an intercourse that could
lead to no pleasing issue.

But the issue was nearer than she expected. One day, in Herbert's
absence, Lady Pelham began to discuss with his wife, or rather _to_ her,
the never-failing subject of her duplicity and disobedience. She was not
interrupted by any expression of regret or repentance from the culprit,
who maintained a stoical silence, labouring the while to convey
mathematical precision to the crimping of a baby's cap, an employment
upon which Lady Pelham seemed to look with peculiar abhorrence. From the
turpitude of her daughter's conduct, she proceeded to its consequences.
She knew no right, she said, that people had to encumber their friends
with hosts of beggarly brats. She vowed that none such should ever
receive her countenance or protection. Her rage kindled as she spoke.
She inveighed against Mrs Herbert's insensibility; and at last talked
herself into such a pitch of fury, as even to abuse her for submitting
to the company of one who could not conceal detestation of her;--a want
of spirit which she directly attributed to the most interested
views;--views which, however, she absolutely swore that she would
defeat. In the energy of her declamation, she did not perceive that
Herbert had entered the room, and stood listening to her concluding
sentences, with a face of angry astonishment. Advancing towards his
wife, he indignantly inquired the meaning of the tumult. 'Nothing,'
answered she, calmly surveying her handywork; 'only my mother is a
little angry, but I have not spoken a word.' He then turned for
explanation to Lady Pelham, whom the flashing of his eye reduced to
instantaneous quiet; and, not finding, in her stammering abstract of the
conversation, any apology for the insult which he had heard, he took his
wife by the arm, and instantly left the house, giving orders that his
baggage should follow him to a little inn in the neighbouring village.
Thus did the insolence of one person, and the hasty spirit of another,
undo what Laura had for months been labouring to effect. The Herberts
never made any attempt at reconciliation, and Lady Pelham would never
afterwards hear them mentioned, without breaking out into torrents of
abuse, and even imprecation, which made Laura's blood run cold. Yet,
with her usual inconsistency, Lady Pelham was vexed at the suspension of
her intercourse with the Herberts; because she thus lost even the shadow
of power over her daughter. Not that she acknowledged this cause of
regret. No! she eloquently bewailed her hard fate, in being exposed to
the censure of the world as at variance with her nearest relatives. She
complained that, with a heart 'warm as melting charity,' she had no one
to love or to cherish. Yet Laura could not always forbear smiling at the
perverse direction of her aunt's regrets. Lady Pelham was angry, not
that her own unkindness had driven her children from her, but that
Laura's officious benevolence had brought them to her house; a measure
from which, she was pleased to say that no person of common sense could
have expected a different issue.




CHAPTER XXIII


If Lady Pelham repined at the desertion of the Herberts, it was not
because their departure consigned her to solitude. Never had Walbourne
attracted so many visitors. Lady Pelham's beautiful niece drew thither
all the gentlemen of the neighbourhood. The ladies followed them of
course. The beauty and modesty of Laura charmed the men, while the women
were half-inclined to think it an unfounded slander that such a
good-natured, obliging, neat-handed creature studied mathematics, and
read Tacitus in the original.

Among the society to which she was introduced by Lady Pelham, and still
more among that in which she mingled at Norwood, Laura met with persons
of distinguished ability, rank, and politeness. In such company she
rapidly acquired that ease of address which alone was wanting to make
her manners as fascinating as they were correct. She grew accustomed to
find herself the object of attention, and though no habit could
reconcile her to the gaze of numbers, she gradually learnt to carry into
these lesser occasions, the self-command which distinguished her in more
important concerns. In real modesty and humility she improved every day;
for it was the study of her life to improve in them. She retained all
the timidity which is the fruit of genuine sensibility and quick
perception of impropriety, while she lost that bashfulness which owes
its growth to solitude and inexperience. Her personal charms, too,
increased as they approached maturity. The symmetry of her form and
features was indeed scarcely susceptible of improvement; but added
gracefulness gave new attractions to her figure; while the soul lent its
improving strength and brightness to animate her face with charms which
mere symmetry knows not.

With such qualifications Laura could not fail to excite admiration; yet
never perhaps did beauty so seldom listen to its own praises. It was
labour lost to compliment one who never rewarded the flatterer with one
smile of gratified vanity, or repaid him with one complaisant departure
from the simple truth. To the everyday nothings of the common herd she
listened with a weariness which politeness could sometimes scarcely
suppress. 'Oh would,' thought she, 'that civil nothings, as they are
called, required no answer,--or that one obliging gentleman would
undertake the labour of replying to the rest!' If addressed in the
language of common-place compliment by one whom she respected, her look
of mortification intelligibly said, 'Has then your penetration searched
me deeper than I know myself, and detected in me the more than childish
weakness of valuing myself on such distinctions as those you are
praising?'

Laura had no personal vanity; and therefore it required no effort to
withstand such praise. She had more merit in the more strenuous but less
successful exertions which she made to resist the silent flattery of the
respectful glance that awaited her decision, besought her approbation,
or reflected her sentiments. Sometimes she thought Montague De Courcy an
adept in this sort of flattery. But more frequently, when administered
by him, she forgot to call it by that name; and she was the less upon
her guard against his homage, because it was never offered in any more
palpable form.

Fortified by the advice of his mother, who had convinced him that a
premature disclosure of his sentiments would be fatal to his hopes, and
aware, that were he even successful with Laura, some further provision
must be made for his sister, ere he could with justice increase the
expence of his household, he acted with such caution as baffled the
penetration of common observers. The neighbouring tea-tables were rather
inclined to consign his affections to a lively young heiress, whose
estate had formerly been dismembered from that of Norwood; for he had
flirted with her at a review, and danced with her at the county ball.
Moreover, the charitable declared, 'that if he was backward it was not
for want of encouragement, that Miss allowed herself strange liberties;
though, to be sure, heiresses might do any thing.'

In spite of the lynx eye in detecting embryo passion, which is ascribed
to the sex, Montague's secret was safe even from Laura herself; or if a
momentary suspicion had glanced across her mind, she chid it away with
self accusations of vanity, and recollections of the ten thousand
opportunities for a declaration which he had suffered to pass
unimproved. Besides, Mrs De Courcy had once hinted that Montague's
little fits of melancholy and absence were occasioned by his partiality
for a lady whose affections were pre-engaged, and Laura was sure that
the hint could not refer to herself. Her humiliating secret, she was
thankful, was safely lodged in her own breast, and could never be
divulged to cover her with mortification.

That which any effort of imagination can ascribe to the influence of
Cupid, no woman ever attributed to any other power; and if, at any time,
a shade crossed the open countenance of Montague, Laura called to mind
his mother's hint, and added to her truly sisterly affection a pity
which lent indescribable softness to her manners towards him. Indeed she
always treated him with undisguised regard, and Montague tried to be
satisfied. Yet he could not help longing to read, in some inadvertent
glance, a proof that all the heart was not freely shewn. In vain!--the
heart was open as the day; and all was there that could delight the
friend, but nothing that could satisfy the lover.

He had, however, none of the temptations of jealousy to betray his
secret, for his rivals were neither numerous nor formidable. Laura was
known to have no fortune; she had little talent for chit chat, and still
less for flattery; thus amid universal admiration and general good-will,
she had only two professed adorers--one, who haunted her while present,
toasted her when absent, and raved of her charms, both in prose and
rhime, without ever suffering his pretensions to become so serious as to
afford her a pretext for seriously repulsing them--the other, a prudent
elderly widower, who, being possessed of a good fortune, and a
full-grown daughter, thought himself entitled to consult his taste
without regard to pecuniary views, and conceived that Laura might be
useful to the young lady in the double capacities of companion and
example. Laura's answer to his proposals was a firm but gentle refusal,
while she assured him, that she would not abuse his confidence nor
betray the trust he had reposed in her. Elderly gentlemen are seldom
inclined to publish a repulse. The widower never mentioned his even to
Lady Pelham; and Laura, on this occasion, owed to her principle an
escape from many a tedious remonstrance, and many a covert attack.

The summer had almost glided away, and Montague continued to fluctuate
between hope and fear, his mother to cherish his hopes and allay his
apprehensions, Laura to be tranquil, Harriet to be gay, and Lady Pelham
to exhibit, by turns, every various degree of every various humour, when
one morning Miss De Courcy, who had lately returned from a visit to a
companion, accompanied her brother on horseback to Walbourne. Lady
Pelham was, as usual, engaged in her garden, but the visitors had no
sooner entered the room where Laura sat, then she observed that they
seemed to have exchanged characters. Harriet looked almost thoughtful,
while the countenance of De Courcy sparkled with unusual animation. He
was gay even to restlessness. He offered to give Laura her lesson in
mathematics; and before it was half over, having completely bewildered
both himself and his pupil, he tossed away the book, declaring that he
never in his life was so little fit for thinking. Pleasure spoke in
every tone of his voice, or sported in his eye when he was silent.

After a short visit, enlivened by a hilarity which Laura found more
infectious than the gravity of Harriet, he proposed leaving his sister
with her friend, while he rode on to call for a gentleman in the
neighbourhood. 'Begone, then,' cried Laura, gaily, 'for I long to
question Harriet what has given you such enviable spirits this morning.'
'Ah, she must not betray me,' said De Courcy, half smiling, half
sighing, 'or I forfeit my only chance of being remembered when I am out
of sight. If she can be silent, curiosity may perhaps befriend me.' 'How
very humble!' cried Laura,--'as if curiosity were the only name you
could find for the interest I take in what makes you gay, or Harriet
grave!' 'Dear Laura,' said De Courcy, ardently, 'give the cause what
name you will, if you will but think of me.' Then snatching her lily
hands, he pressed them to his lips, and the next moment was gone.

Confused, surprised, a little displeased, Laura stood silently revolving
his behaviour. He had never before made the slightest approach to
personal familiarity. Had her frankness invited the freedom? 'Dear
Laura!' It was the first time he had ever called her by any name less
respectful than Miss Montreville. 'Well, and what then--it were mere
prudery to be displeased at such a trifle. What,' thought she, 'can have
delighted him so much? Perhaps the lady is kind at last. He need not,
however, have vented his transports upon me.' And Laura was a little
more angry than before.

During her cogitation, Laura forgot that she might apply to her
companion for a solution of the mystery; perhaps she did not even
recollect that Harriet was in the room, till happening to turn her head,
she met a glance of sly inquisition, which, however, was instantly
withdrawn. Harriet made no comment on the subject of her observation.
'The man is as much elated,' cried she, 'as if I were five-and-forty,
and had never had a lover before.'

'You, my dear Harriet,' exclaimed Laura, instantly recovering her good
humour, 'is it a conquest of yours that has pleased Mr De Courcy so
much?' 'Even so,' returned Harriet--'Heigho!'

'I congratulate you: and yet it does not seem to delight you quite so
much as it does your brother.'

'Really Laura I am not sure whether it does or not; so I am come to ask
you.'

'Me! Indeed you have too much confidence in my penetration; but you
have, fortunately, abler, and more natural advisers. Your mother'--

'Oh, my mother is so cautious, so afraid of influencing me! when to be
influenced is the very thing I want. I do hate caution. Then I can't
talk it over with her as I could with you. And then, there's Montague
who looks so provokingly pleased; and yet he pretends to prim up his
mouth, and say, "really it is a subject on which he neither can, nor
ought to give an opinion." Pray, advise me, my dear.'

'What! before I know who the gentleman is; when perhaps you have even no
right to inform me!'

'Pshaw! nonsense.--It is Bolingbroke. But I believe you have never met
with him.' 'So you would have me advise you to marry a man whom I have
never seen; for of course that is the advice you want. Had the balance
lain on the other side, no advice would have been thought necessary.'
'Poh,' cried Harriet pouting. 'I don't want to be advised to marry him.'
'Are you sure,' returned Laura, smiling, 'that you know what you
want.'--'Saucy girl! I would have you tell me whether I am ever likely
to marry him!' 'Do you think I am by birth entitled to the second-sight,
that I should foresee this before I know any thing of the gentleman's
merits, or, what is of more consequence, of their rank in your
estimation?' 'The man has good legs,' said Harriet, plaiting the fingers
of her glove with great industry. 'Legs! really, Harriet, I was in hopes
I had for once found you serious.'--'So I am; my dear; I never was so
serious before, and hope I never shall again. Yet I don't know what to
think; so I shall just tell you honestly how the matter stands, and you
shall think for me.'

'I will not promise that; but I own I have some curiosity to hear your
_honest_ confession.'--'Oh you need not peep so archly askance under
those long eyelashes; I can stand a direct look, I assure you; for at
this moment I have not the slightest preference in the world for
Bolingbroke over half a score of others.' 'Then what room is there for
hesitation?' 'Why, my dear, in the first place, he has a noble fortune:
though that goes for nothing with you; secondly, he is really a good
creature, and far from a fool; then, to talk in your style, I have had
advantages in observing his temper and dispositions such as I shall
never have with any other man; for his sister and I have been companions
from childhood, and I have lived under his roof for months; then, which
will weigh with you more than all, he is Montague's particular
favourite.' 'Great recommendations these, Harriet; sufficient at least
to bias any woman who intends to marry. I should like to know Mr
Bolingbroke.' 'Here is his letter, my dear,' said Harriet; 'it came
inclosed in one to my brother. There is a good deal of the man's turn in
it.'

Laura took the letter, and read as follows:

     'I will not wrong your penetration so much as to suppose that
     this letter will surprise you, or that you will fail to
     anticipate the subject on the first glance at the signature.
     Nor do I write to tell you, in the hackneyed phrase, that the
     happiness of my whole life depends upon you, because, next to
     your affection, nothing is so desirable to me as your esteem,
     and the hope that, though you should reject my suit, you will
     continue to respect my understanding. But I may with truth
     declare, that I prefer you to all women; that I love you, not
     only in spite of your faults, but, perhaps, even the more for
     them; and that, to forfeit the hope of your affection, would
     dispel many a long-cherished vision of domestic peace, and even
     some lighter dreams of rapture. Dearest Harriet, do not, in
     return for this confession, write me a cold profession of
     esteem. I know already that you esteem me, for you have long
     known me possessed of qualities that inevitably engage esteem;
     but I am conscious of a deficiency in the gifts that excite
     passion, and I dread that I may never awaken sentiments like
     those I feel. Yet it is no small compliment which I offer, when
     I suppose you superior to the attractions which captivate the
     vulgar of your sex; and you may value it the more, because it
     is perhaps the only one I shall ever pay you.

     'To say all this, or something like it, has long been in my
     thoughts; and, during your late visit to my sister, occupied
     them more than I shall own; but a dread of I know not what,
     forced me to let you depart without offering to your acceptance
     all that I have to offer. I felt a certainty that I was not
     yet beloved, and, I believe I feared that you, in your lively
     way, (so I must call it, since no epithet that implies reproof
     must flow from a lover's pen), would give utterance to the
     feeling of the moment, and bid me think of you no more. Is it
     presumption to say, that I hope more from a more considerate
     decision? Ask your own heart, then, dear Miss De Courcy,
     whether time and the assiduities of respectful love can beguile
     you of such tenderness as is due to a confiding affectionate
     husband. Ask yourself, whether you can ever return my warm
     attachment, to such a degree as will make the duties of a wife
     easy and pleasant to you. I need not assure you that I am not
     the selfish wretch who could find joy in receiving those which
     were painfully and reluctantly performed. Be candid with
     yourself then I adjure you. Fear not that I shall persecute you
     with importunity or complaint. If it must be so, I will see you
     no more for some months; and, at the end of that time, shall
     expect, in reward of my self-conquest, to be received with
     cordiality as your brother's friend. If your sentence be
     against me, save yourself the pain of telling me so; for I know
     that it must be painful to you. Yet judge of the strength of
     that regard which is thus anxious to shield you from
     uneasiness, at the moment when it anticipates such pain from
     your hands. If you can give me hope (and, observe, when I say
     hope, I do not mean certainty), do not tax your delicacy for
     studied phrases of acceptance, but write me even a common card
     of invitation to Norwood, and the tenderest billet that ever
     was penned by woman, never gave more pleasure than it will
     bring to your very affectionate and obedient servant,

                                 'EDWARD BOLINGBROKE.'

Laura could not help smiling at the composed style of this epistle, so
different from the only ones of its kind with which she was conversant.
A lover confess that his mistress had faults, and that he was sensible
of them!--insinuate that he expected not only duty, but willing and
grateful duty from his wife!--have the boldness to expect, that, if his
passion were unsuccessful, he should quickly be able to conquer it!
Laura felt no inclination to envy her friend a lover so fully in the
exercise of his judgment and foresight; but she was pleased with the
plain honest rationality of the letter; and, with the materials before
her, immediately busied her imagination in its favourite work of
sketching and adorning character.

She was called from her meditation by another petition for advice. 'You
see,' said Harriet, 'he pretends not to expect certainty; but it is much
the same whether one run one's neck into the noose, or gets entangled so
that one can't decently get off. If I could _creditably_ contrive to
keep him dangling till I had made up my mind,' continued she,
illustrating the metaphor with her watch-chain. 'Do assist me, my dear;
I am sure you have managed a dozen of them in your time.'

'My experience is not so extensive,' replied Laura, 'and I can really
assist you to no _creditable_ method of trifling.'

'You would not have me resolve to marry a man whom I don't care a
farthing for.' 'No, indeed! but I think Mr Bolingbroke would have a
right to complain, if you gave hopes which you did not fulfil.' 'You
would have me dismiss him at once then?' 'By no means; but I would have
you think for yourself on a subject of which no other person can judge;
and remember, my dear, that, as your decision has neither been wrested
from you by surprise, nor seduced from you by persuasion, you have no
excuse for forming a weak or wavering resolution.'

Determined that on such a subject she would deliver no opinion, Laura
was relieved from some embarrassment by the return of De Courcy. His
reflections during his ride had effectually quelled the exuberance of
his spirits, and he endeavoured to repair his unguardedness by distant
politeness. His manner increased the feeling of restraint of which Laura
could not at that time divest herself; and after a short and constrained
sequel to a visit which had begun so differently, Montague hurried his
sister away.

'I shall never conquer her indifference,' said he to his mother, after
relating the folly of the morning. 'Had you seen her frozen look of
displeasure, you would have been convinced.' 'And how, my dear Montague,
could you expect Miss Montreville to receive such freedom? like a little
village coquette gasping at the prospect of a first lover? If you are
convinced that your secret would still be heard without pleasure, you
must redouble your caution to preserve it. But suffer me to warn you
against the extreme of reserve in which I have sometimes observed that
you are apt to fall. It can only confirm suspicions if they are excited;
if not, it will disgust by an appearance of caprice.'

Montague promised to be guarded; and withdrew to seek in his laboratory
a refuge from despondence. Those who pursue worldly gains and vulgar
pleasures, must cheerlessly toil on, waiting for their reward till their
end is attained; but the pursuits of science and of virtue have this
advantage peculiar to themselves, that there is reward in the labour,
even though the success be only partial; and, in half an hour, all
Montague's cares were absorbed in the muriatic acid. In a few days he
again saw Laura, and her sunny smile of welcome revived hopes which she
little thought of fulfilling.

When a woman of ordinary delicacy is brought to hesitate upon the
proposal of a lover, it is easy, provided prudence be on his side, to
conjecture how the balance will turn. Mr Bolingbroke received his card
of invitation to Norwood; and his suit advanced prosperously, though
slowly. He was a plain unpretending man, seven years at least beyond
excuse for any youthful indiscretion, habitually silent, though sure of
commanding attention when he spoke. The perfect fairness and integrity
of his mind had secured him the respect of all his acquaintance in a
degree which he appeared to have precisely estimated, and he never
seemed to expect less or to exact more. His calm unobtrusive manners
never captivated a stranger, nor gave offence to an intimate. He was
kind and generous to a sister, who, twenty years before, had succeeded
as his play-thing to tops and marbles; and uniformly respectful to a
maiden aunt who had, about the same date, replaced his mother as
directress of the family.

His father had been long dead, and in consequence of his steady
resistance of all the batteries of charms opened against him, or rather
against his £7000 a-year, the ladies had begun to shake their heads, and
pronounce him a determined bachelor. But, notwithstanding their
decision, Mr Bolingbroke was resolved to marry, for he considered
marriage as one of the duties of his station.

Harriet amused, became customary, pleasing, necessary, to him. 'Our
dissimilarity will assist us to correct each other's failings,' thought
he, and his choice was fixed. He was aware that a grave elderly man
might find some difficulty in attaching a volatile girl; and though he
could not condescend to flatter even his mistress, he was assiduous to
please. He bestowed an infinity of little attentions, which were the
more gratifying, because, from a man of his temper, they were wholly
unexpected. His books, his horses, his carriage, waited but a
half-expressed wish. He planned little excursions and parties of
pleasure, or contrived to add some agreeable surprise to those which
were proposed by others. Far from shewing any paltry jealousy, he
treated Miss De Courcy's favourites of both sexes with distinguished
politeness; and perhaps he owed his success with a heart which had
withstood more attractive admirers, partly to the agreeable
associations which he found means to raise, partly to vanity, pleased
with power over the philosophic Mr Bolingbroke.

Montague watched the progress of his friend with keen interest, but he
conscientiously avoided influencing Harriet's decision. On the contrary,
lest the dread of future dependence should weigh with her, he informed
her, that, should she prefer a single life, or should other
circumstances render such a sum important to her, he was determined to
double the little fortune he had already given.

While he was anxious to see his sister's happiness secured by her union
with an estimable man, he felt that her marriage with Mr Bolingbroke
would immediately remove one grand obstacle to his own wishes; for the
little dower which he was determined ere he settled in life to save for
Harriet, would form an addition altogether insignificant to the splendid
settlement which was now in her power. There was nothing Quixotic in the
justice and generosity of De Courcy; and he had no intention of
incurring real difficulty and privation for the sake of adding a trifle
to the stores of affluence. He therefore considered his sister's
marriage as leaving him at full liberty to pursue his inclinations with
regard to Laura, if the time should ever arrive when he could declare
them without hazarding the forfeiture of even his present stinted
measure of favour.




CHAPTER XXIV


One day Miss De Courcy expressed a wish to shew Laura the collection of
paintings at a celebrated seat in the neighbourhood. Mr Bolingbroke
immediately undertook to procure the permission of the noble owner, who
was his relation; and the party was speedily arranged. Mrs Penelope's
sociable, as Mr Bolingbroke always called it, was to convey his aunt,
his sister, Harriet, and Mrs De Courcy, to whom the genial warmth of the
season had partially restored the use of her limbs. Mrs Penelope piqued
herself upon rising with the lark, and enforcing the same wholesome
habit upon the whole household; the Bolingbrokes were, therefore, to
take an early breakfast at Norwood, and then to proceed on their
excursion. De Courcy and Mr Bolingbroke were to ride. Lady Pelham and
Laura were to join the party in the grounds.

The weather proved delightful; and, after spending some hours in
examining the paintings, in which Laura derived additional pleasure from
the skilful comments of De Courcy, the party proceeded to view the
grounds, when she, with almost equal delight, contemplated a finished
specimen of modern landscape-gardening. Pursuing, as usual, his cautious
plan, Montague divided his attentions pretty equally between the elder
ladies and Miss Bolingbroke, bestowing the least part upon her for whom
he would willingly have reserved all; while Harriet, in good humour with
herself, and with all around her, frankly gave her arm to her lover; and
sometimes laughing, sometimes blushing, suffered herself to loiter, to
incline her head in listening to somewhat said in a half-whisper, and to
answer it in an under tone; without recollecting that she had resolved,
till she had _quite_ made up her mind, to restrain her habitual
propensity to flirting.

De Courcy was certainly above the meanness of envy, yet he could not
suppress a sigh as, with Mrs Penelope and his mother leaning on his
arms, while Laura walked behind with Miss Bolingbroke, he followed
Harriet and his friend into the darkened path that led to a hermitage.
The walk was shaded by yew, cypress, and other trees of dusky foliage,
which, closing into an arch, excluded the gaudy sunshine. As they
proceeded, the shade deepened into twilight, and the heats of noon gave
place to refreshing coolness. The path terminated in a porch of
wicker-work, forming the entrance to the hermitage, the walls of which
were composed of the roots of trees, on the outside rugged as from the
hand of nature, but within polished and fancifully adorned with shells
and fossils. Opposite to the entrance, a rude curtain of leopard skin
seemed to cover a recess; and Harriet, hastily drawing it aside, gave to
view a prospect gay with every variety of cheerful beauty. The meadows,
lately cleared from their burden, displayed a vivid green, and light
shadows quickly passed over them and were gone. The corn-fields were
busy with the first labours of the harvest. The village spires were
thickly sown in the distance. More near, a rapid river flashed bright to
the sun; yet the blaze came chastened to the eye, for it entered an
awning close hung with the graceful tendrils of the passion-flower.

The party were not soon weary of so lovely a landscape, and returning to
the more shady apartment, found an elegant collation of fruits and ices,
supplied by the gallantry of Mr Bolingbroke. Never was there a more
cheerful repast. Lady Pelham was luckily in good humour, and therefore
condescended to permit others to be so too. Laura, happily for herself,
possessed a faculty not common to beauties--she could be contented where
another was the chief object of attention; and she was actually enjoying
the court that was paid to her friend, when, accidentally raising the
vine leaf which held the fruit she was eating, she observed some verses
pencilled on the rustic table in a hand-writing familiar to her
recollection.

Sudden instinct made her hastily replace the leaf, and steal a glance to
see whether any other eye had followed her's. No one seemed to have
noticed her; but Laura's gaiety had vanished. The lines were distinct,
as if recently traced; and Laura's blood ran chill at the thought, that,
had she even a few hours sooner visited this spot, she might have met
Colonel Hargrave. 'He may still be near,' thought she; and she wished,
though she could not propose, to be instantly gone. None of her
companions, however, seemed inclined to move. They continued their
merriment, while Laura, her mind wholly occupied with one subject,
again stole a glimpse of the writing. It was undoubtedly Hargrave's;
and, deaf to all that was passing around her, she fell into a reverie,
which was first interrupted by the company rising to depart.

Though she had been in such haste to be gone, she was now the last to
go. In her momentary glance at the sonnet, she had observed that it was
inscribed to her. 'Of what possible consequence,' thought she, 'can it
be to me?' yet she lingered behind to read it. In language half
passionate, half melancholy, it complained of the pains of absence and
the cruelty of too rigid virtue; but it broke off abruptly, as if the
writer had been suddenly interrupted.

So rapidly did Laura glance over the lines, that her companions had
advanced but a few paces, ere she was hastening to follow them. On
reaching the porch, she saw that the walk was just entered by two
gentlemen. An instant convinced her that one of them was Hargrave.
Neither shriek nor exclamation announced this discovery, but Laura,
turning pale, shrunk back out of view. Her first feeling was eager
desire of escape; her first thought, that, returning to the inner
apartment, she might thence spring from the lofty terrace, on the verge
of which the hermitage was reared. She was deterred, by recollecting the
absurd appearance of such an escape, and the surprise it would occasion.
But what was to be done? There was no third way of leaving the place
where she stood, and if she remained, in a few moments Hargrave would be
there.

These ideas darted so confusedly through her mind, that it seemed rather
by instinct than design, that she drew her hat over her face, and
doubled her veil in order to pass him unnoticed. She again advanced to
the porch; but perceived, not without consternation, that Hargrave had
joined her party, and stood talking to Lady Pelham in an attitude of
easy cordiality. Laura did not comment upon the free morality which
accorded such a reception to such a character; for she was sick at
heart, and trembled in every limb. Now there was no escape. He would
certainly accost her, and she must answer him--answer him without
emotion! or how would Mr De Courcy--how would his mother construe her
weakness! What would Hargrave himself infer from it! What, but that her
coldness sprung from mere passing anger! or, more degrading still, from
jealousy! The truant crimson now rushed back unbidden; and Laura
proceeded with slow but steady steps.

During her short walk she continued to struggle with herself. 'Let me
but this once command myself,' said she. 'And wherefore should I not? It
is he who ought to shrink.--It is he who ought to tremble!' Yet it was
Laura who trembled, when, advancing towards her, Lady Pelham introduced
her to Colonel Hargrave as her niece. Laura's inclination of the head,
cold as indifference could make it, did not seem to acknowledge former
intimacy; and when Hargrave, with a manner respectful even to timidity,
claimed her acquaintance, she gave a short answer of frozen civility,
and turned away. Shrinking from even the slightest converse with him,
she hastily passed on; then, determined to afford him no opportunity of
speaking to her, she glided in between Mrs De Courcy, who stood
anxiously watching her, and Harriet, who was studying the contour of
Hargrave's face; and offering an arm to each, she gently drew them
forward.

Mr Bolingbroke immediately joined them, and entered into conversation
with Harriet; while Mrs De Courcy continued to read the legible
countenance of Laura, who silently walked on, revolving in her mind the
difference between this and her last unexpected meeting with Hargrave.
The freedom of his address to the unfriended girl who was endeavouring
to exchange the labour of her hands for a pittance to support existence,
(a freedom which had once found sympathetic excuse in the breast of
Laura), she now, not without indignation, contrasted with the respect
offered to Lady Pelham's niece, surrounded by the rich and the
respectable. Yet while she remembered what had then been her
half-affected coldness, her ill-restrained sensibility; and compared
them with the total alienation of heart which she now experienced, she
could not stifle a sigh which rose at the recollection, that in her the
raptures of love and joy were chilled never more to warm. 'Would that my
preference had been more justly directed,' thought she, her eye
unconsciously wandering to De Courcy; 'but that is all over now!'

From idle regrets, Laura soon turned to more characteristic meditation
upon the conduct most suitable for her to pursue. Hargrave had joined
her party; had been acknowledged, by some of them at least, as an
acquaintance; and had particularly attached himself to Lady Pelham, with
whom he followed in close conversation. Laura thought he would probably
take the first opportunity of addressing himself to her; and if her
manner towards him corresponded with the bent of her feelings,
consciousness made her fear, that in her distance and constraint Lady
Pelham's already suspicious eye would read more than merely dislike to a
vicious character. Hargrave himself, too, might mistake who so nearly
resembled her former manner for the veil of her former sentiments. She
might possibly escape speaking to him for the present, but if he was
fixed in the neighbourhood, (and something of the woman whispered that
he would not leave it immediately), they would probably meet where to
avoid him was not in her power. After some minutes of close
consideration, she concluded, that to treat Colonel Hargrave with easy
civil indifference, best accorded with what she owed to her own dignity;
and was best calculated, if he retained one spark of sensibility or
discernment, to convince him that her sentiments had undergone an
irrevocable change. This method, therefore, she determined to pursue;
making, with a sigh, this grand proviso, that she should find it
practicable.

Mrs De Courcy, who guessed the current of her thoughts, suffered it to
proceed without interruption; and it was not till Laura relaxed her
brow, and raised her head, like one who has taken his resolution, that
her companion, stopping, complained of fatigue; proposing, as her own
carriage was not in waiting, to borrow Lady Pelham's, and return home,
leaving the other ladies to be conveyed in Mrs Penelope's sociable to
Norwood, where the party was to dine. Not willing to direct the proposal
to Laura, upon whose account chiefly it was made, she then turned to Mrs
Penelope, and inquired whether she did not feel tired with her walk; but
that lady, who piqued herself upon being a hale active woman of her age,
declared herself able for much greater exertion, and would walk, she
said, till she had secured an appetite for dinner. Laura, who had
modestly held back till Mrs Penelope's decision was announced, now
eagerly offered her attendance, which Mrs De Courcy, with a little
dissembled hesitation, accepted, smiling to perceive how well she had
divined her young favourite's inclinations.

The whole party attended them to the spot where the carriages were
waiting. On reaching them, Mr Bolingbroke, handing in Mrs De Courcy,
left Laura's side for the first time free to Hargrave, who instantly
occupied it; while Montague, the drops standing on his forehead, found
himself shackled between Mrs Penelope and Miss Bolingbroke. 'Ever dear,
ever revered Miss Montreville'--Hargrave began in an insinuating
whisper. 'Sir!' cried Laura, starting with indignant surprise. 'Nay,
start not,' continued he in an under voice; 'I have much, much to say.
Lady Pelham allows me to visit Walbourne; will you permit me to'--Laura
had not yet studied her lesson of easy civility, and therefore the
courtesy of a slight inclination of the head was contradicted by the
tone in which she interrupted him, saying, 'I never presume, Sir, to
select Lady Pelham's visitors.'

She had reached the door of the carriage, and Hargrave took her hand to
assist her in entering. Had Laura been prepared, she would have suffered
him, though reluctantly, to do her this little service; but he took her
unawares, and snatching back her hand as from the touch of a loathsome
reptile, she sprang, unassisted, into her seat.

As the carriage drove off, Mrs De Courcy again apologized for separating
Laura from her companions; 'though I know not,' added she, 'whether I
should not rather take credit for withdrawing you from such dangerous
society. All ladies who have stray hearts must guard them either in
person or by proxy, since this formidable Colonel Hargrave has come
among us.' 'He has fortunately placed the more respectable part of us in
perfect security,' returned Laura, with a smile and voice of such
unembarrassed simplicity as fully satisfied her examiner.

Had Laura spent a lifetime in studying to give pain, which, indeed, was
not in all her thoughts, she could not have inflicted a sharper sting on
the proud heart of Hargrave, than by the involuntary look and gesture
with which she quitted him. The idea of inspiring with disgust, unmixed
irresistible disgust, the woman upon whose affections, or rather upon
whose passions, he had laboured so zealously and so long, had ever been
more than he could bear, even when the expression of her dislike had no
witness; but now she had published it to chattering misses and prying
old maids, and more favoured rivals. Hargrave bit his lip till the blood
came; and, if the lightning of the eye could scathe, his wrath had been
far more deadly to others.

After walking for some minutes surly and apart, he began to comfort
himself with the hopes of future revenge. 'She had loved him,
passionately loved him, and he was certain she could not be so utterly
changed. Her behaviour was either all affectation, or a conceit of the
strength of her own mind, which all these clever women were so vain of.
But the spark still lurked somewhere, whatever she might imagine, and if
he could turn her own weapons against herself.'--Then, recollecting that
he had resolved to cultivate Lady Pelham, he resumed his station by her
side, and was again the courtly, insinuating Colonel Hargrave.

Hargrave had lately acquired a friend, or rather an adviser (the
dissolute have no friends), who was admirably calculated to supply the
deficiencies of his character as a man of pleasure. Indeed, except in so
far as pleasure was his constant aim, no term could, with less justice,
have been applied to Hargrave; for his life was chiefly divided between
the goadings of temptations to which he himself lent arms, and the pangs
of self-reproach which he could not exclude, and would not render
useful. The strait and narrow way he never had a thought of treading,
but his wanderings were more frequent than he intended, his returns more
lingering. The very strength of his passions made him incapable of deep
or persevering deceit; he was humane to the suffering that pressed
itself on his notice, if it came at a convenient season; and he was
disinterested, if neglect of gold deserve the name. Lambert, his new
adviser, had no passions, no humanity, no neglect of gold. He was a
gamester.

The practice of this profession, for, though a man of family and fortune
he made it a profession, had rendered him skilful to discern, and
remorseless to use the weaknesses of his fellow creatures. His estate
lay contiguous to --, the little town where Hargrave had been quartered
when he visited at Norwood; but the year which Hargrave passed at -- was
spent by Lambert almost entirely alone in London. He had returned
however to the country, had been introduced to Hargrave, and had just
fixed upon him as an easy prey, when the soldier was saved for a time,
by receiving intimation of his promotion, and orders to join his
regiment in a distant county.

They met again in an evil hour, just as Hargrave had half-determined to
abandon as fruitless his search after Laura. The necessity of a
stimulant was as strong as ever. Another necessity too was strong, for
£10,000 of damages had been awarded to Lord Bellamer; Hargrave could not
easily raise the money, and Lord Lincourt refused to advance a shilling.
'A pretty expensive pleasure has this Lady Bellamer been to me,' said
Hargrave, bestowing on her Ladyship a coarse enough epithet; for even
fine gentlemen will sometimes call women what they have found them to
be. He was prevailed on to try the gaming-table for the supply of both
his wants, and found that pleasure fully twice as expensive. His friend
introduced him to some of those accommodating gentlemen who lend money
at illegal interest, and was generous enough to supply him when they
would venture no more upon an estate in reversion. Lambert had
accidentally heard of the phoenix which had appeared at Walbourne; and,
on comparing the description he received of her with that to which with
politic patience he had often listened, he had no doubt of having found
the object of Hargrave's search. But, as it did not suit his present
views that the lover should renew the pursuit, he dropt not a hint of
his discovery, listening, with a gamester's insensibility, to the
regrets which burst forth amidst the struggles of expiring virtue, for
her whose soft influence would have led to peace and honour.

At last a dispute arising between the worthy Mr Lambert and his
respectable coadjutors, as to the partition of the spoil, it occurred to
him that he could more effectually monopolize his prey in the country;
and thither accordingly he was called by pressing business. There he was
presently so fortunate as to discover a Miss Montreville, on whose
charms he descanted in a letter to Hargrave in such terms, that, though
he averred she could not be Hargrave's Miss Montreville, Hargrave was
sure she could be no other; and, as his informer expected, arrived in
----shire as soon as a chaise and four could convey him thither.

Lambert had now a difficult game to play, for he had roused the leading
passion, and the collateral one could act but feebly; but they who often
tread the crooked path, find pleasure in its intricacy, vainly
conceiting that it gives proof of their sagacity, and Lambert looked
with pleasure on the obstacles in his way. He trusted, that while the
master-spirit detained Hargrave within the circle of Walbourne, he might
dexterously practise with the lesser imp of evil.

Had his letter afforded a clue to Laura's residence, Hargrave would have
flown directly to Walbourne, but he was first obliged to stop at --; and
Lambert, with some difficulty, persuaded him, that, as he was but
slightly known to Lady Pelham, and probably in disgrace with her
protegée, it would be more politic to delay his visit, and first meet
them at Lord --'s, where he had information that they were to go on the
following day. 'You will take your girl at unawares,' said he, 'if she
be your girl; and that is no bad way of feeling your ground.' The vanity
of extorting from Laura's surprise some unequivocal token of his power
prevailed on the lover to delay the interview till the morning; and,
after spending half the evening in dwelling upon the circumstances of
his last unexpected meeting with her, which distance softened in his
imagination to more than its actual tenderness, he, early in the morning
set out with Lambert for --, where he took post in the hermitage, as a
place which no stranger omitted to visit.

Growing weary of waiting, he dispatched Lambert as a scout; and, lest he
should miss Laura, remained himself in the hermitage, till his emissary
brought him information that the party were in the picture gallery.
Thither he hastened; but the party had already left the house, and thus
had Laura accidental warning of his approach. No reception could have
been so mortifying to him, who was prepared to support her sinking under
the struggle of love and duty, of jealousy and pride. No struggle was
visible; or, if there was, it was but a faint strife between native
courtesy and strong dislike. He had boasted to Lambert of her
tenderness; the specimen certainly was not flattering. Most of her
companions were little more gracious. De Courcy paid him no more
attention than bare civility required.--With the Bolingbrokes he was
unacquainted, but the character of his companion was sufficient reason
for their reserve. Lady Pelham was the only person present who soothed
his wounded vanity. Pleased with the prospect of unravelling the mystery
into which she had pried so long in vain, charmed with the easy
gallantry and adroit flattery of which Hargrave, in his cooler moments,
was consummate master, she accepted his attentions with great
cordiality; while he had the address tacitly to persuade her that they
were a tribute to her powers of entertaining.

Before they parted, she had converted her permission to visit Walbourne
into a pressing invitation, nay, had even hinted to De Courcy the
propriety of asking the Colonel to join the dinner party that day at
Norwood. The hint, however, was not taken; and therefore, in her way
home, Lady Pelham indulged her fellow-travellers with sundry moral and
ingenious reflections concerning the folly of being 'righteous over
much;' and on the alluring accessible form of the true virtue,
contrasted with the repulsive, bristly, hedgehog-like make of the false.
Indeed, it must be owned, that for the rest of the evening her
Ladyship's conversation was rather sententious than agreeable; but the
rest of the party, in high good humour, overlooked her attacks, or
parried them in play.

Montague had watched the cold composure of Laura on Hargrave's first
accosting her, and seen the gesture which repulsed him at parting; and
though in the accompanying look he lost volumes, his conclusions, on the
whole, were favourable. Still a doubt arose, whether her manner sprung
not from the fleeting resentment of affection; and he was standing
mournfully calculating the effects of Hargrave's perseverance, when his
mother, in passing him as she followed her guests to the eating-room,
said, in an emphatical whisper, 'I am satisfied. There is no worm in the
bud.'

Mrs De Courcy's encouraging assertion was confirmed by the behaviour of
Laura herself; for she maintained her usual serene cheerfulness; nor
could even the eye of love detect more than one short fit of
distraction; and then the subject of thought seemed any thing rather
than pleasing retrospect, or glad anticipation. The company of his
friends, Harriet's pointedly favourable reception of Mr Bolingbroke's
assiduities, and the rise of his own hopes, all enlivened Montague to
unusual vivacity, and led him to a deed of daring which he had often
projected, without finding courage to perform it. He thought, if he
could speak of Hargrave to Laura, and watch her voice, her eye, her
complexion, all his doubts would be solved. With this view, contriving
to draw her a little apart, he ventured, for the first time, to name his
rival; mentioned Lady Pelham's hint; and, faltering, asked Laura whether
he had not done wrong in resisting it.

'Really,' answered Laura with a very _naïve_ smile, and a very faint
blush, 'I don't wonder you hesitate in offering me such a piece of
flattery as to ask my opinion.'

'Do not tax me with flattering you,' said De Courcy earnestly; 'I would
as soon flatter an apostle; but tell me candidly what you think.'

'Then, candidly,' said Laura, raising her mild unembarrassed eye to his,
'I think you did right, perfectly right, in refusing your countenance to
a person of Colonel Hargrave's character. While vice is making her
encroachments on every hand, it is not for the friends of virtue to
remove the ancient landmarks.'

Though this was one of the stalest pieces of morality that ever Montague
had heard Laura utter, he could scarcely refrain from repaying it by
clasping her to his heart. Convinced that her affections were free, he
could not contain his rapture, but exclaimed, 'Laura, you are an angel!
and, if I did not already love beyond all power of expression, I should
be'--He raised his eyes to seek those of Laura, and met his mother's,
fixed on him with an expression that compelled him to silence.--'You
should be in love with me;' said Laura, laughing, and filling up the
sentence as she imagined it was meant to conclude. 'Well, I shall be
content with the second place.'

Mrs De Courcy, who had approached them, now spoke on some indifferent
subject, and saved her son from a very awkward attempt at explanation.
She drew her chair close to Laura, and soon engaged her in a
conversation so animated, that Montague forgot his embarrassment, and
joined them with all his natural ease and cheerfulness. The infection of
his ease and cheerfulness Laura had ever found irresistible. Flashes of
wit and genius followed the collision of their minds; and the unstudied
eloquence, the poetic imagery of her style, sprung forth at his touch,
like blossoms in the steps of the fabled Flora.

Happy with her friends, Laura almost forgot the disagreeable adventure
of the morning; and, every look and word mutually bestowing pleasure,
the little party were as happy as affection and esteem could make them,
when Lady Pelham, with an aspect like a sea fog, and a voice suitably
forbidding, inquired whether her niece would be pleased to go home, or
whether she preferred sitting chattering there all night. Laura, without
any sign of noticing the rudeness of this address, rose, and said she
was quite ready to attend her Ladyship. In vain did the De Courcys
entreat her to prolong her visit till the morning. To dare to be happy
without her concurrence, was treason against Lady Pelham's dignity; and
unfortunately she was not in a humour to concur in the joy of any living
thing. De Courcy's reserve towards her new favourite she considered as a
tacit reproof of her own cordiality; and she had just such a conviction
that the reproof was deserved, as to make her thoroughly out of humour
with the reprover, with herself, and consequently with everybody else.
Determined to interrupt pleasure which she would not share, the more her
hosts pressed her stay, the more she hastened her departure; and she
mingled her indifferent good nights to them with more energetic
reprimands to the tardiness of her coachman.

'Thank heaven,' said she, thrusting herself into the corner of her
carriage with that jerk in her motion which indicates a certain degree
of irritation, 'to-morrow we shall probably see a civilized being.' A
short pause followed. Laura's plain integrity and prudence had gained
such ascendancy over Lady Pelham, that her niece's opinion was to her
Ladyship a kind of second conscience, having, indeed, much the same
powers as the first. Its sanction was necessary to her quiet, though it
had not force to controul her actions. On the present occasion she
wished, above all things, to know Laura's sentiments; but she would not
condescend to ask them directly. 'Colonel Hargrave's manners are quite
those of a gentleman,' she resumed. The remark was entirely ineffectual;
for Laura coolly assented, without inquiring whether he were the
civilized being whom Lady Pelham expected to see. Another pause.
'Colonel Hargrave will be at Walbourne to-morrow,' said Lady Pelham, the
tone of her voice sharpening with impatience. 'Will he, Ma'am?' returned
Laura, without moving a muscle. 'If Miss Montreville has no objections,'
said Lady Pelham, converting by a toss of her head and a twist of her
upper lip, the words of compliment into an insult. 'Probably,' said
Laura, with a smile, 'my objections would make no great
difference.'--'Oh, to be sure!' returned Lady Pelham, 'it would be lost
labour to state them to such an obstinate, unreasonable person as I am!
Well, I believe you are the first who ever accused me of obstinacy.' If
Lady Pelham expected a compliment to her pliability, she was
disappointed; for Laura only answered, 'I shall never presume to
interfere in the choice of your Ladyship's visitors.'

That she should be thus compelled to be explicit was more than Lady
Pelham's temper could endure. Her eyes flashing with rage, 'Superlative
humility indeed!' she exclaimed with a sneer; but, awed, in spite of
herself, from the free expression of her fury, she muttered it within
her shut teeth in a sentence of which the words 'close' and 'jesuitical'
alone reached Laura's ear. A long and surly silence followed; Lady
Pelham's pride and anger struggling with her desire to learn the
foundation and extent of the disapprobation which she suspected that her
conduct excited. The latter, at last, partly prevailed; though Lady
Pelham still disclaimed condescending to direct consultation.

'Pray, Miss Montreville,' said she, 'if Colonel Hargrave's visits were
to _you_, what mighty objections might your sanctity find to
them?'--Laura had long ago observed that a slight exertion of her spirit
was the best _quietus_ to her aunt's ill humour; and, therefore,
addressing her with calm austerity, she said, 'Any young woman, Madam,
who values her reputation, might object to Colonel Hargrave's visits,
merely on the score of prudence. But even my "superlative humility" does
not reconcile me to company which I despise; and my "sanctity," as your
Ladyship is pleased to call it, rather shrinks from the violator of laws
divine and human.'

Lady Pelham withdrew her eyes to escape a glance which they never could
stand; but, bridling, she said, 'Well, Miss Montreville, I am neither
young nor sanctimonious, therefore your objections cannot apply to
Colonel Hargrave's visits to me; and I am determined,' continued she,
speaking as if strength of voice denoted strength of resolution, 'I am
determined, that I will not throw away the society of an agreeable man,
to gratify the whims of a parcel of narrow-minded bigots.'

To this attack Laura answered only with a smile. She smiled to see
herself classed with the De Courcys; for she had no doubt that they were
the 'bigots' to whom Lady Pelham referred. She smiled, too, to observe
that the boasted freedom of meaner minds is but a poor attempt to hide
from themselves the restraint imposed by the opinions of the wise and
good.

The carriage stopped, and Laura took sanctuary in her own apartment; but
at supper she met her aunt with smiles of unaffected complacency, and,
according to the plan which she invariably pursued, appeared to have
forgotten Lady Pelham's fit of spleen; by that means enabling her aunt
to recover from it with as little expence to her pride as possible.




CHAPTER XXV


Lady Pelham was not disappointed in her expectation of seeing Colonel
Hargrave on the following day. He called at Walbourne while her Ladyship
was still at her toilette; and was shown into the drawing-room, where
Laura had already taken her station. She rose to receive him, with an
air which shewed that his visit gave her neither surprise nor pleasure;
and, motioning him to a distant seat, quietly resumed her occupation.
Hargrave was a little disconcerted. He expected that Laura would shun
him, with marks of strong resentment, or perhaps with the agitation of
offended love; and he was prepared for nothing but to entreat the
audience which she now seemed inclined to offer him.

Lovers are so accustomed to accuse ladies of cruelty, and to find ladies
take pleasure in being so accused, that unlooked-for kindness
discomposes them; and a favour unhoped is generally a favour undesired.
The consciousness of ill desert, the frozen serenity of Laura's manner,
deprived Hargrave of courage to use the opportunity which she seemed
voluntarily to throw in his way. He hesitated, he faltered; while, all
unlike her former self, Laura appeared determined that he should make
love, for she would not aid his dilemma even by a comment on the
weather. All the timidity which formerly marked her demeanour, was now
transferred to his; and, arranging her work with stoical composure, she
raised her head to listen, as Hargrave approaching her stammered out an
incoherent sentence expressive of his unalterable love, and his fears
that he had offended almost beyond forgiveness.

Laura suffered him to conclude without interruption; then answered, in a
voice mild but determined, 'I had some hopes, Sir, from your knowledge
of my character and sentiments, that, after what has passed, you could
have entertained no doubts on this subject.--Yet, lest even a shadow of
suspense should rest on your mind, I have remained here this morning on
purpose to end it. I sincerely grieve to hear that you still retain the
partiality you have been pleased to express, since it is now beyond my
power to make even the least return.'

The utmost bitterness of reproach would not have struck so chilly on the
heart of Hargrave as these words, and the manner in which they were
uttered. From the principles of Laura he had indeed dreaded much; but he
had feared nothing from her indifference. He had feared that duty might
obtain a partial victory; but he had never doubted that inclination
would survive the struggle. With a mixture of doubt, surprise, and
anguish, he continued to gaze upon her after she was silent; then
starting, he exclaimed--'I will not believe it; it is impossible. Oh,
Laura, choose some other way to stab, for I cannot bear this!'--'It
pains me,' said Laura, in a voice of undissembled concern, 'to add
disappointment to the pangs which you cannot but feel; yet it were most
blameable now to cherish in you the faintest expectation.'--'Stop,'
cried Hargrave, vehemently, 'if you would not have me utterly undone. I
have never known peace or innocence but in the hope of your love; leave
me a dawning of that hope, however distant. Nay, do not look as if it
were impossible. When you thought me a libertine, a seducer--all that
you can now think me, you suffered me to hope. Let me but begin my trial
now, and all woman-kind shall not lure me from you.'

'Ah,' said Laura, 'when I dreamt of the success of that trial, a strange
infatuation hung over me. Now it has passed away for ever. Sincerely do
I wish and pray for your repentance, but I can no longer offer to reward
it. My desire for your reformation will henceforth be as disinterested
as sincere.'

Half distracted with the cutting calmness of her manner, so changed
since the time when every feature spoke the struggles of the heart, when
the mind's whole strength seemed collected to resist its tenderness,
Hargrave again vehemently refused to believe in her indifference. ''Tis
but a few short months,' he cried, grasping her hand with a violence
that made her turn pale; ''tis but a few short months since you loved me
with your whole soul, since you said that your peace depended upon my
return to virtue. And dare you answer it to yourself to cast away the
influence, the only influence that can secure me?'

'If I have any influence with you,' returned Laura, with a look and an
attitude of earnest entreaty, 'let it but this once prevail, and then be
laid aside for ever. Let me persuade you to the review of your conduct;
to the consideration of your prospects as an accountable being, of the
vengeance that awaits the impenitent, of the escape offered in the
gospel. As you value your happiness, let me thus far prevail. Or if it
will move you more,' continued she, the tears gushing from her eyes, 'I
will beseech you to grant this, my only request; in memory of a love
that mourned your unworthiness almost unto death.'

The sight of her emotions revived Hargrave's hopes; and, casting himself
at her feet, he passionately declared, while she shuddered at the
impious sentiment, that he asked no heaven but her love, and cared not
what were his fate if she were lost. 'Ah, Sir,' said she, with pious
solemnity, 'believe me, the time is not distant when the disappointment
of this passion will seem to you a sorrow light as the baffled sports of
childhood. Believe the testimony of one who but lately drew near to the
gates of the grave. On a death-bed, guilt appears the only real misery;
and lesser evils are lost amidst its horror like shadows in a
midnight-gloom.'

The ideas which Laura was labouring to introduce into the mind of
Hargrave were such as he had of late too successfully endeavoured to
exclude. They had intruded like importunate creditors; till, oft refused
admittance, they had ceased to return. The same arts which he had used
to disguise from himself the extent of his criminality, he now naturally
employed to extenuate it in the sight of Laura. He assured her that he
was less guilty than she supposed; that she could form no idea of the
force of the temptation which had overcome him; that Lady Bellamer was
less the victim of his passions than of her own; he vehemently protested
that he despised and abhorred the wanton who had undone him; and that,
even in the midst of a folly for which he now execrated himself, his
affections had never wandered from their first object. While he spoke,
Laura in confusion cast down her eyes, and offended modesty suffused her
face and neck with crimson. She could indeed form no idea of a heart
which, attached to one woman, could find any temptation in the
allurements of another. But when he ended, virtuous indignation flashing
in her countenance, 'For shame, Sir!' said she. 'If any thing could
degrade you in my eyes it were this mean attempt to screen yourself
behind the partner of your wickedness. Does it lessen your guilt that it
had not even the poor excuse of passion; or think you that, even in the
hours of a weakness for which you have given me such just reason to
despise myself, I could have prized the affections of a heart so
depraved? You say you detest your crime; I fear you only detest its
punishment; for, were you really repentant, my opinion, the opinion of
the whole world, would seem to you a trifle unworthy of regard, and the
utmost bitterness of censure be but an echo to your own
self-upbraidings.'

Hargrave had no inclination to discuss the nature of repentance. His
sole desire was to wrest from Laura some token, however slight, of
returning tenderness. For this purpose he employed all the eloquence
which he had often found successful in similar attempts. But no two
things can be more different in their effects, than the language of
passion poured into the sympathizing bosom of mutual love, or addressed
to the dull ear of indifference. The expressions which Laura once
thought capable of warming the coldest heart seemed now the mere ravings
of insanity; the lamentations which she once thought might have softened
rocks, now appeared the weak complainings of a child for his lost toy.
With a mixture of pity and disgust she listened and replied; till the
entrance of Lady Pelham put a period to the dialogue, and Laura
immediately quitted the room.

Lady Pelham easily perceived that the conversation had been particular;
and Hargrave did not long leave her in doubt as to the subject. He
acquainted her with his pretensions to Laura, and begged her sanction to
his addresses; assuring her that his intercourse with Lady Bellamer was
entirely broken off, and that his marriage would secure his permanent
reformation. He complimented Lady Pelham upon her liberality of
sentiment and knowledge of the world; from both of which he had hopes,
he said, that she would not consider one error as sufficient to blast
his character. Lady Pelham made a little decent hesitation on the score
of Lady Bellamer's prior claims; but was assured that no engagement had
ever subsisted there. 'She hoped Lord Lincourt would not be averse.' She
was told that Lord Lincourt anxiously desired to see his nephew settled.
'She hoped Colonel Hargrave was resolved that his married life should be
irreproachable. Laura had a great deal of sensibility, it would break
her heart to be neglected; and Lady Pelham was sure, that in that case
the thought of having consented to the dear child's misery would be more
than she could support!' Her Ladyship was vanquished by an assurance,
that for Laura to be neglected by her happy husband was utterly
impossible.

'Laura's inclinations then must be consulted; every thing depended upon
her concurrence, for the sweet girl had really so wound herself round
Lady Pelham's heart, that positively her Ladyship could not bear to give
her a moment's uneasiness, or to press her upon a subject to which she
was at all averse.' And, strange as it may seem, Lady Pelham at that
moment believed herself incapable of distressing the person whom, in
fact, she tormented with ceaseless ingenuity! Hargrave answered by
confessing his fears that he was for the present less in favour than he
had once been; but he disclosed Laura's former confessions of
partiality, and insinuated his conviction that it was smothered rather
than extinguished.

Lady Pelham could now account for Laura's long illness and low spirits;
and she listened with eager curiosity to the solution of the enigma,
which had so long perplexed her. She considered whether she should
relate to the lover the sorrows he had caused. She judged (for Lady
Pelham often _judged_ properly) that it would be indelicate thus to
proclaim to him the extent of his power; but, with the usual
inconsistency between her judgment and her practice, in half an hour she
had informed him of all that she had observed, and hinted all that she
suspected. Hargrave listened, was convinced, and avowed his conviction
that Lady Pelham's influence was alone necessary to secure his success.
Her Ladyship said, 'that she should feel some delicacy in using any
strong influence with her niece, as the amiable orphan had no friend but
herself, had owed somewhat to her kindness, and might be biassed by
gratitude against her own inclination. The fortune which she meant to
bequeath to Laura might by some be thought to confer a right to advise;
but, for her part, she thought her little all was no more than due to
the person whose tender assiduities filled the blank which had been left
in her Ladyship's maternal heart by the ingratitude and disobedience of
her child.' This sentiment was pronounced in a tone so pathetic, and in
language so harmonious, that, though it did not for a moment impose upon
her hearer, it deceived Lady Pelham herself; and she shed tears, which
she actually imagined to be forced from her by the mingled emotions of
gratitude and of disappointed tenderness.

Lady Pelham had now entered on a subject inexhaustible; her own
feelings, her own misfortunes, her own dear self. Hargrave, who in his
hours of tolerable composure was the most polite of men, listened, or
appeared to listen, with unconquerable patience, till he fortunately
recollected an appointment which his interest in her Ladyship's
conversation had before banished from his mind; when he took his leave,
bearing with him a very gracious invitation to repeat his visit.

With him departed Lady Pelham's fit of sentimentality; and, in five
minutes, she had dried her eyes, composed the paragraph which was to
announce the marriage of Lord Lincourt (for she killed off the old peer
without ceremony) to the lovely heiress of the amiable Lady Pelham;
taken possession of her niece's barouche and four, and heard herself
announced as the benefactress of this new wonder of the world of
fashion. She would cut off her rebellious daughter with a shilling; give
her up to the beggary and obscurity which she had chosen, and leave her
whole fortune to Lady Lincourt; for so, in the fulness of her content,
she called Laura. After some time enjoying her niece's prospects, or to
speak more justly her own, she began to think of discovering how near
they might be to their accomplishment; and, for this purpose, she
summoned Laura to a conference.

Lady Pelham loved nothing on earth but herself; yet vanity, gratified
curiosity, and, above all, the detection of a mere human weakness
reducing Laura somewhat more to her own level awakened in her breast an
emotion resembling affection; as, throwing her arms round her niece,
she, in language half sportive, half tender, declared her knowledge of
Laura's secret, and reproached her with having concealed it so well.
Insulted, wronged, and forsaken by Hargrave, Laura had kept his secret
inviolable, for she had no right to disclose it; but she scorned, by any
evasion, to preserve her own. Glowing with shame and mortification, she
stood silently shrinking from Lady Pelham's looks; till, a little
recovering herself, she said, 'I deserve to be thus humbled for my folly
in founding my regards, not on the worth of their object, but on my own
imagination; and more, if it be possible, do I deserve, for exposing my
weakness to one who has been so ungenerous as to boast of it. But it is
some compensation to my pride,' continued she, raising her eyes, 'that
my disorder is cured beyond the possibility of relapse.' Lady Pelham
smiled at Laura's security, which she did not consider as an infallible
sign of safety. It was in vain that Laura proceeded solemnly to protest
her indifference. Lady Pelham could allow for self-deceit in another's
case, though she never suspected it in her own. Vain were Laura's
comments upon Hargrave's character; they were but the fond revilings of
offended love. Laura did not deny her former preference; she even owed
that it was the sudden intelligence of Hargrave's crimes which had
reduced her to the brink of the grave; therefore Lady Pelham was
convinced that a little perseverance would fan the smothered flame; and
perseverance, she hoped, would not be wanting. Nevertheless, as her
Ladyship balanced her fondness for contradicting by her aversion to
being contradicted, and as Laura was too much in earnest to study the
qualifying tone, the conference concluded rather less amicably than it
began; though it ended by Lady Pelham's saying, not very consistently
with her sentiments an hour before, that she would never cease to urge
so advantageous a match, conceiving that she had a right to influence
the choice of one whom she would make the heiress of forty thousand
pounds. Laura was going to insist that all influence would be
ineffectual, but her aunt quitted her without suffering her to reply.
She would have followed to represent the injustice of depriving Mrs
Herbert of her natural rights; but she desisted on recollecting that
Lady Pelham's purposes were like wedges, never fixed but by resistance.

The time had been when Lady Pelham's fortune would have seemed to
Hargrave as dust in the balance, joined with the possession of Laura. He
had gamed, had felt the want of money; and money was no longer
indifferent to him. But Laura's dower was still light in his estimation,
compared with its weight in that of Lambert, to whom he accidentally
mentioned Lady Pelham's intention. That prudent person calculated that
£40,000 would form a very handsome addition to a fund upon which he
intended to draw pretty freely. He had little doubt of Hargrave's
success; he had never known any woman with whom such a lover could fail.
He thought he could lead his friend to bargain for immediate possession
of part of his bride's portion, and, for certainty of the rest in
reversion, before parting with his liberty. He allowed two, or perhaps
even three months for the duration of Laura's influence; during which
time he feared he should have little of her husband's company at the
gaming-table; but from thenceforth, he judged that the day would be his
own, and that he should soon possess himself of Hargrave's property, so
far as it was alienable. He considered that, in the meantime, Laura
would furnish attraction sufficient to secure Hargrave's stay at --, and
he trusted to his own dexterity for improving that circumstance to the
best advantage. He failed not, therefore, to encourage the lover's
hopes, and bestowed no small ridicule on the idea that a girl of
nineteen should desert a favourite on account of his gallantry.

Cool cunning would engage with fearful odds against imprudence, if it
could set bounds to the passions, as well as direct their course. But it
is often deceived in estimating the force of feelings which it knows
only by their effects. Lambert soon found that he had opened the passage
to a torrent which bore all before it. The favourite stimulus found, its
temporary substitute was almost disregarded; and Hargrave, intoxicated
with his passion, tasted sparingly of the poisoned cup which his friend
designed for him. His time and thoughts were again devoted to Laura, and
gaming was only sought as a relief from the disappointment and vexation
which generally attended his pursuit. The irritation of his mind,
however, made amends for the lessened number of opportunities for
plundering him, by rendering it easier to take advantage of those which
remained.

The insinuating manners and elegant person of Hargrave gained daily on
the favour of Lady Pelham; for the great as well as the little vulgar
are the slaves of mere externals. She permitted his visits at home and
his attendance abroad, expatiating frequently on the liberality of
sentiment which she thus displayed. At first these encomiums on her own
conduct were used only to disguise from herself and others her
consciousness of its impropriety; but she repeated them till she
actually believed them just, and considered herself as extending a
charitable hand to rescue an erring brother from the implacable
malignity of the world.

She was indefatigable in her attempts to promote his success with Laura.
She lost no opportunity of pressing the subject. She obstinately refused
to be convinced of the possibility of overcoming a strong prepossession.
Laura, in an evil hour for herself, thoughtlessly replied, that
affection was founded on the belief of excellence, and must of course
give way when the foundation was removed. This observation had just
fallacy sufficient for Lady Pelham's purpose. She took it for her text,
and harangued upon it with all the zeal and perseverance of disputation.
She called it Laura's theory; and insisted that, like other theorists,
she would shut her eyes against the plainest facts, nay, stifle the
feelings of her own mind, rather than admit what might controvert her
opinion. She cited all the instances which her memory could furnish of
agricultural, and chemical, and metaphysical theorism; and, with
astonishing ingenuity, contrived to draw a parallel between each of them
and Laura's case. It was in vain that Laura qualified, almost retracted
her unlucky observation. Her adversary would not suffer her to desert
the untenable ground. Delighted with her victory, she returned again
and again to the attack, after the vanquished had appealed to her mercy;
and much more than 'thrice she slew the slain.'

Sick of arguing about the possibility of her indifference, Laura at
length confined herself to simple assertions of the fact. Lady Pelham at
first merely refused her belief; and, with provoking pity, rallied her
niece upon her self-deceit; but, finding that she corroborated her words
by a corresponding behaviour to Hargrave, her Ladyship's temper betrayed
its accustomed infirmity. She peevishly reproached Laura with taking a
coquettish delight in giving pain; insisted that her conduct was a
tissue of cruelty and affectation; and upbraided her with
disingenuousness in pretending an indifference which she could not feel.
'And does your Ladyship communicate this opinion to Colonel Hargrave?'
said Laura, one day, fretted almost beyond her patience by a
remonstrance of two hours continuance. 'To be sure I do,' returned Lady
Pelham. 'In common humanity I will not allow him to suffer more from
your perverseness than I can avoid.' 'Well, Madam,' said Laura, with a
sigh and a shrug of impatient resignation, 'nothing remains but that I
shew a consistency, which, at least is not common to affectation.'

Lady Pelham's representations had their effect upon Hargrave. They
brought balm to his wounded pride, and he easily suffered them to
counteract the effect of Laura's calm and uniform assurances of her
indifference. While he listened to these, her apparent candour and
simplicity, the regret she expressed at the necessity of giving pain,
brought temporary conviction to his mind; and, with transports of
alternate rage and grief, he now execrated her inconstancy, then his own
unworthiness; now abjured her, then the vices which had deprived him of
her affection. But the joint efforts of Lady Pelham and Lambert always
revived hopes sufficient to make him continue a pursuit which he had not
indeed the fortitude to relinquish.

His love (if we must give that name to a selfish desire, mingled at
times with every ungentle feeling), had never been so ardent. The
well-known principle of our nature which adds charms to what is
unattainable, lent new attractions to Laura's really improved
loveliness. The smile which was reserved for others seemed but the more
enchanting; the hand which he was forbidden to touch seemed but the more
soft and snowy; the form which was kept sacred from his approach,
bewitched him with more resistless graces. Hargrave had been little
accustomed to suppress any of his feelings, and he gave vent to this
with an entire neglect of the visible uneasiness which it occasioned to
its subject. He employed the private interviews, which Lady Pelham
contrived to extort for him, in the utmost vehemence of complaint,
protestation, and entreaty. He laboured to awaken the pity of Laura; he
even condescended to appeal to her ambition; and persevered, in spite of
unequivocal denials, till Laura, disgusted, positively refused ever
again to admit him without witnesses.

His public attentions were, if possible, still more distressing to her.
Encouraged by Lady Pelham, he, notwithstanding the almost repulsive
coldness of Laura's manner, became her constant attendant. He pursued
her wherever she went; placed himself, in defiance of propriety, so as
to monopolize her conversation; and seemed to have laid aside all his
distinguishing politeness, while he neglected every other woman to
devote his assiduities to her alone. He claimed the station by her side
till Laura had the mortification to observe that others resigned it at
his approach; he snatched every opportunity of whispering his adulations
in her ear; and, far from affecting any concealment in his preference,
seemed to claim the character of her acknowledged adorer. It is
impossible to express the vexation with which Laura endured this
indelicate pre-eminence. Had Hargrave been the most irreproachable of
mankind, she would have shrunk from such obtrusive marks of his
partiality; but her sense of propriety was no less wounded by the
attendance of such a companion, than her modesty was shocked by her
being thus dragged into the notice, and committed to the mercy of the
public. The exclusive attentions of the handsome Colonel Hargrave, the
mirror of gallantry, the future Lord Lincourt, were not, however
undesired, to be possessed unenvied. Those who unsuccessfully angled for
his notice, avenged themselves on her to whom they imputed their
failure, by looks of scorn, and by sarcastic remarks, which they
sometimes contrived should reach the ear of the innocent object of their
malice. Laura, unspeakably averse to being the subject of even laudatory
observation, could sometimes scarcely restrain the tears of shame and
mortification that were wrung from her by attacks which she could
neither resent nor escape. In spite of the natural sweetness of her
temper, she was sometimes tempted to retort upon Colonel Hargrave the
vexation which he caused to her: and his officiousness almost compelled
her to forsake the civility within the bounds of which she had
determined to confine her coldness.

He complained bitterly of this treatment, and reproached her with taking
ungenerous advantage of his passion. 'Why then,' said she, 'will you
force me into the insolence of power. If you will suffer me to consider
you as a common acquaintance, I shall never claim a right to avenge on
you the wrongs of society; but approach no nearer.--I am unwilling to
express a sentiment less respectful than dislike.' The proud spirit of
Hargrave, however, could ill brook the repulses which he constantly
provoked; and often in transports of rage he would break from Laura,
swearing that he would no more submit to be thus made the sport of an
insensible tyrannical woman.

At first she submitted with patience to his injurious language, in the
hope that he would keep his oaths; but she soon found that he only
repaid her endurance of his anger by making her submit to what was yet
more painful, a renewal of his abject supplications. All her caution
could not prevent the private interviews which she granted so
unwillingly. He haunted her walks, stole upon her unannounced, detained
her almost by force at these accidental meetings, or at those which he
obtained by the favour of Lady Pelham. His whole conduct conspired to
make him an object of real dread to Laura, though her watchful
self-command and habitual benevolence preserved him from her aversion.

Sometimes she could not help wondering at the obstinacy of her
persecutor. 'Surely,' said she to him, 'after all I have said, after the
manner in which I have said it, you cannot expect any fruit from all
these rhapsodies; you must surely think your honour bound to keep them
up, at whatever hazard to the credit of your understanding.' Laura had
never herself submitted to be driven into a course of actions contrary
to reason, and it never occurred to her that her lover had no reason for
his conduct, except that he was not sufficiently master of himself to
desist from his pursuit.

From the importunities of Hargrave, however, Laura could sometimes
escape. Though they were frequent, they were of necessity intermitting.
He could not always be at Walbourne; he could not intrude into her
apartment. She visited sometimes where he was not admitted, or she could
decline the invitation which she knew extended to him. But her
persecutions by Lady Pelham had no intermission; from them she had no
retreat. Her chamber was no sanctuary from so familiar a friend; and the
presence of strangers only served to exercise her Ladyship in that
ingenious species of conversation which addresses to the _sense_ of one
of the company what it conveys to the _ear_ of the rest.

For some time she employed all her forces in combating Laura's supposed
affectation; and when, not without extreme difficulty, she was convinced
that she strove against a phantom of her own creation, she next employed
her efforts to alter her niece's determination. She tried to rouse her
ambition; and again and again expatiated on all the real and on all the
imaginary advantages of wealth and title. The theme in her Ladyship's
hands seemed inexhaustible, though Laura repeatedly declared that no
earthly thing could be less in her esteem than distinctions which she
must share with such a person as Hargrave. Every day and all day, the
subject was canvassed, and the oft-confuted argument vamped up anew,
till Laura was thoroughly weary of the very names of rank, and
influence, and coronets, and coaches.

Next, her Ladyship was eloquent upon Laura's implacability. 'Those who
were so very unforgiving,' she supposed, 'were conscious that they had
no need to be forgiven. Such people might pretend to be Christians, but
in her opinion such pretensions were mere hypocrisy.' Laura stood amazed
at the strength of self-deception which could produce this sentiment
from lips which had pronounced inextinguishable resentment against an
only child. Recovering herself, she calmly made the obvious reply, 'that
she entertained no enmity against Hargrave; that on the contrary she
sincerely wished him every blessing, and the best of all blessings, a
renewed mind; but that the Christian precept was never meant to make the
vicious and the impure the denizens of our bosoms.' It might be thought
that such a reply was quite sufficient, but Lady Pelham possessed one
grand qualification for a disputant; she defied conviction. She could
shift, and turn, and bewilder, till she found herself precisely at the
point from whence she set out.

She had a practice, too, of all others the most galling to an ingenuous
and independent spirit--she would invent a set of opinions and
sentiments, and then argue upon them as if they were real. It was in
vain for Laura to disclaim them. Lady Pelham could prove
incontrovertibly that they were Laura's sentiments; or, which was the
same thing, proceeded as if she had proved it. She insisted that Laura
acted on a principle of revenge against Hargrave, for the slight his
inconstancy had put upon her; and argued most convincingly on the folly
and wickedness of a revengeful spirit. Laura in vain protested her
innocence. Lady Pelham was certain of the fact; and she dilated on the
guilt of such a sentiment, and extenuated the temporary recession of
Hargrave, till a bystander must have concluded that Laura was the
delinquent, and he her harmless victim. Her Ladyship declared, that,
'she did not wonder at her niece's obduracy. She had never, in her life,
known a person of cool temper who was capable of forgiving. She had
reason, for her own part, to be thankful that, if she had the failings
of a warm temper, she had its advantages too. She had never, except in
one instance, known what it was to feel permanent displeasure.'

On this topic Lady Pelham had the more room for her eloquence, because
it admitted of no reply; and, perhaps, for this reason it was the sooner
exhausted; for it had not been discussed above half a dozen times,
before she forsook it in order to assert her claims to influence her
niece's decision. And here her Ladyship was suddenly convinced of the
indefensible rights of relationship. 'She stood in the place of Laura's
parents, and in their title might claim authority.' But finding Laura
firmly of opinion that parental authority extended no further than a
negative voice, Lady Pelham laid aside the imperative tone to take up
that of entreaty. 'She would not advance the claim which her tried
friendship might give her to advise; she would only beseech, conjure.
She hoped her importunities would be forgiven, as they could proceed
only from the tenderest regard to her dear girl's wishes. Laura was her
only hope; the sole being on earth to whom her widowed heart clung with
partial affection--and to see her thus throw away her happiness was more
than her Ladyship could bear.' Closely as Laura had studied her aunt's
character, and well as it was now known to her, she was sometimes
overpowered by these expressions of love and sorrow; and wept as she was
compelled to repeat that her happiness and her duty must alike be
sacrificed ere she could yield to the wishes of her friend. But as she
never, even in these moments of softness, betrayed the smallest symptom
of compliance, Lady Pelham had not patience to adhere to the only method
of attack that possessed a chance of success.

Of all her arts of teazing, this was indeed the most distressing to a
person of Laura's sensibility, and she felt not a little relieved when,
exasperated by the failure of all her efforts, Lady Pelham burst into
vehement upbraidings of her niece's hardness of heart. 'She could not
have conceived,' she said, 'such obduracy in one so young; in woman too;
a creature who should be all made up of softness. Laura might pique
herself upon her stoicism, but a Zeno in petticoats was, in her
opinion, a monster. For her part she could never resist entreaty in her
life.'

'Then I beseech you Madam,' said Laura, after having patiently submitted
to be baited thus for three full hours, 'do not make mine an exception;
but for pity's sake be prevailed upon to drop this subject. I assure you
it can have no effect but to distress me.'

'You may be determined, Miss Montreville, that all my endeavours shall
be in vain, but I shall certainly never be so far wanting to my duty as
to neglect pressing upon you a match so much for your honour and
advantage.'

'Is it possible,' cried Laura, losing patience at this prospect of the
continuation of her persecutions, 'that your Ladyship can think it for
my "advantage" to marry a man I despise; for my "honour" to share the
infamy of an adulterer!'

'Upon my word, Miss Montreville,' returned Lady Pelham, reddening with
anger, 'I am constrained to admire the delicacy of your language; so
very suitable to the lips of so very delicate a lady.'

A smile, not wholly free from sarcasm, played on Laura's lips. 'If
delicacy,' said she, 'be henceforth to find so strenuous a supporter in
your Ladyship, I shall hope to be exempted in future from all
remonstrance on the subject of this evening's altercation.'

If Laura really entertained the hope she mentioned, she was miserably
disappointed; for Lady Pelham remitted not a jot of her tormentings. Her
remonstrances were administered in every possible form, upon every
possible occasion. They seasoned every tête à tête, were insinuated into
every conversation. Laura's attempts to avoid the subject were
altogether vain. The discourse might begin with the conquests of Gengis
Khan, but it always ended with the advantages of marrying Colonel
Hargrave.

Teazed and persecuted, disturbed in every useful occupation and every
domestic enjoyment, Laura often considered of the possibility of
delivering herself from her indefatigable tormentors, by quitting the
protection of her aunt and taking refuge with Mrs Douglas. But this plan
she had unfortunately deprived herself of the means of executing.

Laura knew that her cousins, the Herberts, were poor. She knew that Mrs
Herbert was in a situation which needs comforts that poverty cannot
command, and it was vain to expect these comforts from the maternal
compassion of Lady Pelham. She therefore determined to supply them, as
far as possible, from her own little fund; and fearing that a gift from
her might revolt the high spirit of Herbert, she inclosed almost all her
half-year's annuity in a blank cover, and conveyed it to her cousin. All
that she retained was a sum far too small to defray the expence of a
journey to Scotland; and several months were to elapse before she could
recruit her fund. Till then, she had no resource but patience; and she
endeavoured to console herself with a hope that in time the perseverance
of her adversaries would fail.

Often did she with a sigh turn her eyes towards Norwood--Norwood, the
seat of all the peaceful domestic virtues; where the voice of contention
was unheard, where courtly politeness, though duly honoured, held the
second place to the courtesy of the heart. But Mrs De Courcy had never
hinted a wish that Laura should be a permanent inmate of her family,
and, even if she had, there would have been a glaring impropriety in
forsaking Lady Pelham's house for one in its immediate neighbourhood. De
Courcy, too, she thought, was not the kind friend he was wont to be. She
had of late seen him seldom, which was probably caused by the marked
coolness of Lady Pelham's reception; but it had happened unfortunately
that he had twice surprised her in the midst of Hargrave's
extravagancies, when she almost feared to speak to him, lest she should
awaken the furious jealousy to which her tormentor was subject, and she
dreaded that her father's friend (for so she loved to call him)
suspected her of encouraging the addresses of such a lover. During these
visits he had looked, she thought, displeased, and had early taken
leave. Was it kind to judge her unheard? Perhaps, if an opportunity had
been given her, she might have assumed courage to exculpate herself;
but, without even calling to ask her commands, De Courcy was gone with
Mr Bolingbroke to London, to make arrangements for Harriet's marriage.




CHAPTER XXVI


Though Laura could not escape the attacks of Lady Pelham, she sometimes
found means to elude those of Hargrave. She watched his approach; and
whenever he appeared, intrenched herself in her own apartment. She
confined herself almost entirely to the house, and excused herself from
every visit where she thought he might be of the party. He besieged her
with letters; she sent them back unopened. Lady Pelham commanded her to
be present during his visits; she respectfully, but peremptorily,
refused to comply.

She had thus remained a sort of prisoner for some weeks, when her aunt
one morning entered her room with an aspect which Laura could not well
decipher. 'Well, Miss Montreville,' said she, 'you have at last
accomplished your purpose; your capricious tyranny has prevailed at
last; Colonel Hargrave leaves--this morning.' 'Dear Madam,' cried Laura,
starting up overjoyed, 'what a deliverance!' 'Oh to be sure, mighty
cause you have to congratulate yourself upon a deliverance from a man
who might aspire to the first woman in England! But you will never have
it in your power to throw away such another offer. You need hardly
expect to awaken such another passion.'

'I hope, with all my heart, I shall not; but are you certain he will
go?' 'Oh, very certain. He has written to tell me so!' 'I trust he will
keep his word,' said Laura; 'and when I am sure he is gone, I will beg
of your Ladyship to excuse me for a few hours, while I walk to Norwood.
I have been so shackled of late! but the first use I make of my liberty
shall be to visit my friends.' 'I am afraid, my dear,' returned Lady
Pelham, with more gentleness than she was accustomed to use in
contradiction, 'you will scarcely find time to visit Mrs De Courcy. I
have long promised to pass some time with my friend Mrs Bathurst; and I
propose setting off to-morrow. I should die of _ennui_ here, now I have
lost the society that has of late given me so much pleasure.'--'Mrs
Bathurst, Madam? she who was formerly'--'Poh, poh, child,' interrupted
Lady Pelham, 'don't stir up the embers of decayed slander--Will you
never learn to forget the little mistakes of your fellow-creatures? Mrs
Bathurst makes one of the best wives in the world; and to a man with
whom everybody would not live so well.'

Practice had made Laura pretty expert in interpreting her aunt's
language, and she understood more in the present instance than it was
meant she should comprehend. She had heard of Mrs Bathurst's fame, and,
knowing that it was not quite spotless, was rather averse to being the
companion of Lady Pelham's visit; but she never, without mature
deliberation, refused compliance with her aunt's wishes; and she
resolved to consider the matter before announcing opposition. Besides
she was determined to carry her point of seeing Mrs De Courcy, and
therefore did not wish to introduce any other subject of altercation.
'Though I should accompany you to-morrow, Madam,' said she, 'I shall
have time sufficient for my walk to Norwood. The preparations for my
journey cannot occupy an hour; and, if I go to Norwood now,' added she,
tying on her bonnet, 'I can return early. Good morning, Madam; to-day I
may walk in peace.'

Laura felt as if a mountain had been lifted from her breast as she
bounded across the lawn, and thought that Colonel Hargrave was, by this
time, miles distant from Walbourne; but as she pursued her way, she
began to wonder that Lady Pelham seemed so little moved by his
departure. It was strange that she, who had remonstrated so warmly, so
unceasingly, against Laura's behaviour to him, did not more vehemently
upbraid her with its consequences. Lady Pelham's forbearance was not in
character--Laura did not know how to explain it. 'I have taken her by
surprise,' thought she, 'with my excursion to Norwood, but she will
discuss it at large in the evening; and probably in many an evening--I
shall never hear the last of it.'

It was needless, however, to anticipate evil, and Laura turned her
thoughts to the explanation which she was bent on making to her friends.
The more she reflected, the more she was persuaded that De Courcy
suspected her of encouraging the addresses of Hargrave; addresses now
provokingly notorious to all the neighbourhood. He had most probably
communicated the same opinion to his mother; and Laura wished much to
exculpate herself, if she could do so without appearing officiously
communicative. If she could meet Mr De Courcy alone, if he should lead
to the subject, or if it should accidentally occur, she thought she
might be able to speak freely to him; more freely than even to Mrs De
Courcy. 'It is strange, too,' thought she, 'that I should feel so little
restraint with a person of the other sex; less than ever I did with one
of my own.--But my father's friend ought not to be classed with other
men.'

Her eyes yet swam in tears of grateful recollection, when she raised
them to a horseman who was meeting her. It was Montague De Courcy; and,
as he leisurely advanced, Laura's heart beat with a hope that he would,
as he had often done before, dismount to accompany her walk. But
Montague, though evidently in no haste to reach the place of his
destination, stopped only to make a slight inquiry after her health, and
then passed on. Laura's bosom swelled with grief, unmixed with
resentment. 'He thinks,' said she, 'that I invite the attentions of a
libertine; and is it surprising that he should withdraw his friendship
from me! But he will soon know his error.' And again she more cheerfully
pursued her way.

Her courage failed her a little as she entered Norwood. 'What if Mrs De
Courcy too should receive me coldly,' thought she; 'Can I notice it to
her? Can I beg of her to listen to my justification?' These thoughts
gave Laura an air of timidity and embarrassment as she entered the room
where Mrs De Courcy was sitting alone. Her fears were groundless. Mrs De
Courcy received her with kindness, gently reproaching her for her long
absence. Laura assured her that it was wholly involuntary, but 'of
late,' said she, hesitating, 'I have been very little from home.' Mrs De
Courcy gave a faint melancholy smile; but did not inquire what had
confined her young friend. 'Harriet has just left me,' said she, 'to pay
some visits, and to secure the presence of a companion for a very
important occasion. She meant also to solicit yours, if three weeks
hence you are still to be capable of acting as a bridemaid.' Laura
smiling was about to reply, that being in no danger of forfeiting that
privilege, she would most joyfully attend Miss De Courcy; but she met a
glance of such marked, such mournful scrutiny, that she stopped; and the
next moment was covered with blushes. 'Ah!' thought she, 'Mrs De Courcy
indeed believes all that I feared, and more than I feared--What can I
say to her?'

Her embarrassment confirmed Mrs De Courcy's belief; but, unwilling
further to distress Laura, she said, 'Harriet herself will talk over all
these matters with you, and then your own peculiar manner will soften
the refusal into somewhat almost as pleasing as consent; if indeed you
are obliged to refuse.' 'Indeed, Madam,' said Laura, 'nothing can be
further from my thoughts than refusal; I shall most willingly, most
gladly, attend Miss De Courcy; but may I--will you allow me to--to ask
you why you should expect me to refuse?' 'And if I answer you,' returned
Mrs De Courcy, 'will you promise to be candid with me on a subject where
ladies think that candour may be dispensed with?' 'I will promise to be
candid with you on every subject,' said Laura, rejoiced at this
opportunity of entering on her justification. 'Then I will own to you,'
said Mrs De Courcy, 'that circumstances have conspired with public
report to convince me that you are yourself about to need the good
office which Harriet solicits from you. Colonel Hargrave and you share
between you the envy of our little world of fashion.' 'And have you,
Madam--has Harriet--has Mr De Courcy given credit to this vexatious
report!' cried Laura, the tears of mortification filling her eyes. 'Ah
how differently should I have judged of you!'--'My dearest girl,' said
Mrs De Courcy, surprised but delighted, 'I assure you that none of us
would, upon slight grounds, believe any thing concerning you, that you
would not wish us to credit. But, in this instance, I thought my
authority indisputable; Lady Pelham'--'Is it possible,' cried Laura,
'that my aunt could propagate such a report, when she knew the teasing,
the persecution that I have endured.' 'Lady Pelham did not directly
assure me of its truth;' answered Mrs De Courcy; 'but when I made
inquiries, somewhat, I own, in the hope of being empowered to contradict
the rumour, her answer was certainly calculated to make me believe that
you were soon to be lost to us.'--'Lost indeed!' exclaimed Laura. 'But
what could be my aunt's intention. Surely she cannot still expect to
prevail with me. My dear friend, if you knew what I have suffered from
her importunities.--But she has only my advantage in view, though,
surely, she widely mistakes the means.'

Laura now frankly informed Mrs De Courcy of the inquietude she had
suffered from the persevering remonstrances of Lady Pelham, and the
obtrusive assiduities of Hargrave. Mrs De Courcy, though she sincerely
pitied the comfortless situation of Laura, listened with pleasure to the
tale. 'And is all this confidential?' said she, 'so confidential that I
must not mention it even to Montague or Harriet?' 'Oh no, indeed,
Madam,' cried Laura; 'I wish, above all things, that Mr De Courcy should
know it; tell him all, Madam; and tell him too, that I would rather be
in my grave than marry Colonel Hargrave.' Laura had scarcely spoken ere
she blushed for the warmth with which she spoke, and Mrs De Courcy's
smile made her blush again, and more deeply. But the plea which excused
her to herself she the next moment urged to her friend. 'Ah, Madam,'
said she, 'if you had witnessed Mr De Courcy's kindness to my father; if
you had known how my father loved him, you would not wonder that I am
anxious for his good opinion.' 'I do not wonder, my love,' said Mrs De
Courcy, in a tone of heartfelt affection. 'I should be much more
surprised if such a mind as yours could undervalue the esteem of a man
like Montague. But why did not my sweet Laura take refuge from her
tormentors at Norwood, where no officious friends, no obtrusive lovers
would have disturbed her quiet?'

Laura excused herself, by saying that she was sure her aunt would never
have consented to her absence for more than a few hours; but she
promised, now that Lady Pelham's particular reason for detaining her was
removed, that she would endeavour to obtain permission to spend some
time at Norwood. 'I fear I must first pay a much less agreeable visit,'
continued Laura, 'for my aunt talks of carrying me to-morrow to the
house of a Mrs Bathurst, of whom you probably have heard.' Mrs De Courcy
knew that Lady Pelham was on terms of intimacy with Mrs Bathurst, yet
she could not help feeling some surprise that she should choose to
introduce her niece to such a _chaperon_. She did not, however, think it
proper, by expressing her opinion, to heighten Laura's reluctance
towards what she probably could not prevent; and therefore merely
expressed a strong wish that Lady Pelham would permit Laura to spend the
time of her absence at Norwood. Laura, though she heartily wished the
same, knew her aunt too well to expect that a purpose which she had once
announced she would relinquish merely because it would interfere with
the inclinations of others. Still it was not impossible that it might be
relinquished. A thousand things might happen to alter Lady Pelham's
resolution, though they were invincible by entreaty. Laura lingered with
Mrs De Courcy for several hours, and when at last she was obliged to go,
received, at parting, many a kind injunction to remember her promised
visit. As she bent her steps homeward, she revolved in her mind every
chance of escape from being the companion of her aunt's journey. She was
the more averse to attend Lady Pelham because she conjectured that they
would not return before Miss De Courcy's marriage, on which occasion
Laura was unwilling to be absent. But she was sensible that neither this
nor any other reason she could urge, would in the least affect Lady
Pelham's motions. Derham Green, the seat of Mrs Bathurst, was above
ninety miles from Walbourne; and it was not likely that Lady Pelham
would travel so far with the intention of making a short visit.

Laura had quitted the avenue of Norwood and entered the lane which led
to that of Walbourne, when the noise of singing, for it could not be
called music, made her look round; and she perceived that she was
overtaken by a figure in a dingy regimental coat, and a rusty hat,
which, however, regained some of its original shade by a contrast with
the grey side-locks which blew up a-thwart it. This person was applying
the whole force of his lungs to the utterance of 'Hearts of Oak,' in a
voice, the masculine bass of which was at times oddly interrupted by the
weak treble tones of age, while, with a large crabstick, he beat time
against the sides of a starveling ass upon which he was mounted. The
other hand was charged with the double employment of guiding the animal,
and of balancing a large portmanteau, which was placed across its
shoulders. Laura, retaining the habits of her country, addressed the man
with a few words of courtesy, to which he replied with the frankness and
garrulity of an old Englishman; and as they proceeded at much the same
pace, they continued the conversation. It was, however, soon
interrupted. At the gate of a grass field, with which the ass seemed
acquainted, the creature made a full stop.--'Get on,' cried the man,
striking it with his heel. It would not stir. The rider applied the
crabstick more vigorously than before. It had no effect; even an ass can
despise the chastisement with which it is too familiar. The contention
was obstinate; neither party seemed inclined to yield. At last fortune
decided in favour of the ass. The portmanteau slipped from its balance,
and fell to the ground. The man looked dolefully at it. 'How the plague
shall I get it up again?' said he. 'Don't dismount,' said Laura, who now
first observed that her companion had but one leg--'I can lift it up for
you.'

As she raised it, Laura observed that it was directed to Mr Jones, at
Squire Bathurst's, Derham Green, ----shire. Though the name was too
common to excite any suspicion, the address struck her as being the same
place which had so lately occupied her thoughts. 'Have you far to go,'
said she to the man. 'No, Ma'am,' answered he, 'only to Job Wilson, the
carrier's, with this portmanteau, for Colonel Hargrave's gentleman. The
Colonel took Mr Jones with himself in the chay, but he had only room for
one or two of his boxes, so he left this with the groom, and the groom
gave me a pot of porter to go with it.'

The whole affair was now clear. Lady Pelham, finding Laura unmanageable
at home, was contriving that she should meet Colonel Hargrave at a place
where, being among strangers, she would find it less possible to avoid
him. Mrs Bathurst too was probably a good convenient friend, who would
countenance whatever measures were thought necessary. In the first burst
of indignation at the discovery of her aunt's treachery, Laura thought
of retracing her steps to Norwood, never more to enter the presence of
her unworthy relation; but, resentment cooling at the recollection of
the benefits she owed to Lady Pelham, she determined on returning to
Walbourne, to announce in person her refusal to go with her aunt;
conceiving this to be the most respectful way of intimating her
intentions.

As soon as she returned home she retired to her chamber without seeing
Lady Pelham; and immediately dispatched the following note to Mrs De
Courcy. 'My dear Madam, an accident has happened which determines me
against going to Derham Green. Will you think I presume too soon on your
kind invitation, if I say that I shall see you to-morrow at breakfast?
Or will not your benevolence rather acquire a new motive in the
shelterless condition which awaits your very affectionate L.M.'

She then proceeded to make arrangements for her departure, reflecting,
with tears, on the hard necessity which was about to set her at variance
with the only living relation who had ever acknowledged her. She knew
that Lady Pelham would be enraged at the frustration of a scheme, to
accomplish which she had stooped to such artifice; and she feared that,
however gentle might be the terms of her intended refusal, her aunt
would consider it as unpardonable rebellion. She was, however, firmly
resolved against compliance, and all that remained was to use the least
irritating mode of denial.

They met at dinner. Lady Pelham in high good humour, Laura grave and
thoughtful. Lady Pelham mentioned her journey; but, dreading to rouse
her aunt's unwearied power's of objurgation, Laura kept silence; and her
just displeasure rendering her averse to Lady Pelham's company, she
contrived to spend the evening alone.

As the supper hour approached, Laura began to tremble for the contest
which awaited her. She felt herself more than half inclined to withdraw
from the storm, by departing without warning, and leaving Lady Pelham to
discover the reason of her flight after she was beyond the reach of her
fury. But she considered that such a proceeding must imply an
irreconcilable breach with one to whom she owed great and substantial
obligations; and would carry an appearance of ingratitude which she
could not bear to incur. Summoning her courage, therefore, she resolved
to brave the tempest. She determined, that whatever provocation she
might endure, she would offer none but such as was unavoidable; though,
at the same time, she would maintain that spirit which she had always
found the most effectual check to her aunt's violence.

The supper passed in quiet; Laura unwilling to begin the attack; Lady
Pelham glorying in her expected success. Her Ladyship had taken her
candle, and was about to retire, before Laura durst venture on the
subject. 'Good night, my dear,' said Lady Pelham. 'I fear,' replied
Laura, 'I may rather say farewell, since it will be so long ere I see
you again.' 'How do you mean!' inquired Lady Pelham. 'That I cannot
accompany you to Mrs Bathurst's,' replied Laura; fetching, at the close
of her speech, a breath longer than the speech itself. 'You won't go?'
exclaimed Lady Pelham, in a voice of angry astonishment. 'Since it is
your wish that I should,' returned Laura meekly, 'I am sorry that it is
not in my power.' 'And pray what puts it out of your power?' cried Lady
Pelham, wrath working in her countenance. 'I cannot go where I am to
meet Colonel Hargrave.' For a moment Lady Pelham looked confounded, but
presently recovering utterance, she began--'So! this is your Norwood
intelligence; and your charming Mrs De Courcy--your model of
perfection--sets spies upon the conduct of all the neighbourhood!'

Laura reddened at this vulgar abuse of the woman on earth whom she most
revered; but she had set a guard on her temper, and only answered, that
it was not at Norwood she received her information. 'A fortunate, I
should rather say a providential accident,' said she, 'disclosed to me
the whole'--the word 'strategem' was rising to her lips, but she
exchanged it for one less offensive.

'And what if Colonel Hargrave is to be there?' said Lady Pelham, her
choler rising as her confusion subsided. 'I suppose, forsooth, my pretty
prudish Miss cannot trust herself in the house with a man!' 'Not with
Colonel Hargrave, Madam,' said Laura coolly.

Lady Pelham's rage was now strong enough to burst the restraints of
Laura's habitual ascendancy. 'But I say you shall go, Miss,' cried she
in a scream that mingled the fierceness of anger with the insolence of
command. 'Yes I say you shall go; we shall see whether I am always to
truckle to a baby-faced chit, a creature that might have died in a
workhouse but for my charity.' 'Indeed, Madam,' said Laura, 'I do not
forget--I never shall forget--what I owe you; nor that when I was
shelterless and unprotected, you received and cherished me.' 'Then shew
that you remember it, and do what I desire,' returned Lady Pelham,
softened in spite of herself, by the resistless sweetness of Laura's
look and manner. 'Do not, I beseech you, Madam,' said Laura, 'insist
upon this proof of my gratitude. If you do, I can only thank you for
your past kindness, and wish that it had been in my power to make a
better return.' 'Do you dare to tell me that you will not go?' cried
Lady Pelham, stamping till the room shook. 'I beg, Madam,' said Laura
entreatingly, 'I beg of you not to command what I shall be compelled to
refuse.' 'Refuse at your peril!' shrieked Lady Pelham, in a voice scarce
articulate with passion, and grasping Laura's arm in the convulsion of
her rage.

Laura had some times been the witness, but seldom the object of her
aunt's transports; and while Lady Pelham stood eyeing her with a
countenance 'fierce as ten furies,' she, conscious with what burning
shame she would herself have shrunk from making such an exhibition,
sympathetically averted her eyes as if the virago had been sensible of
the same feeling. 'I say refuse at your peril!' cried Lady Pelham.--'Why
don't you speak? obstinate'--'Because,' answered Laura with saintlike
meekness, 'I can say nothing but what will offend you--I cannot go to
Mrs Bathurst's.'

Angry opposition Lady Pelham might have retorted with some small remains
of self-possession, but the serenity of Laura exasperating her beyond
all bounds, she was so far transported as to strike her a violent blow.
Without uttering a syllable, Laura took her candle and quitted the room;
while Lady Pelham, herself confounded at the outrage she had committed,
made no attempt to detain her.

Laura retired to her chamber, and sat quietly down to consider the state
of her warfare, which she determined to conclude by letter, without
exposing her person to another assault; but in a few minutes she was
stormed in her citadel, and the enemy entered, conscious of mistake, but
with spirit unbroken. Lady Pelham had gone too far to retract, and was
too much in the wrong to recant her error; her passion, however, had
somewhat exhausted itself in the intemperate exercise which she had
allowed it; and though as unreasonable as ever, she was less outrageous.
Advancing towards Laura with an air intended to express offended majesty
(for studied dignity is generally the disguise chosen by conscious
degradation), she began, 'Miss Montreville, do you, in defiance of my
commands, adhere to your resolution of not visiting Mrs Bathurst?'
'Certainly, Madam;' replied Laura, provoked that Lady Pelham should
expect to intimidate her by a blow; 'I have seen no reason to relinquish
it.'--'There is a reason, however,' returned Lady Pelham, elevating her
chin, curling her upper lip, and giving Laura the side-glance of
disdain, 'though probably it is too light to weigh with such a
determined lady, and that is, that you must either prepare to attend me
to-morrow, or return to that beggary from which I took you, and never
more enter my presence.' 'Then, Madam,' said Laura, rising with her
native mien of calm command, 'we must part; for I cannot go to Mrs
Bathurst's.'

Laura's cool resistance of a threat which was expected to be all
powerful, discomposed Lady Pelham's heroics. Her eyes flashing fire, and
her voice sharpening to a scream, 'Perverse ungrateful wretch!' she
cried, 'Get out of my sight--leave my house this instant.' 'Certainly,
if you desire it, Madam,' answered Laura, with unmoved self-possession;
'but, perhaps, if you please, I had better remain here till morning. I
am afraid it might give rise to unpleasant observations if it were known
that I left your house at midnight.'

'I care not who knows it--I would have the world see what a viper I have
fostered in my bosom. Begone, and never let me see your hypocritical
face again.'

'Then I hope,' said Laura, 'your Ladyship will allow a servant to
accompany me to Norwood. At this hour it would be improper for me to go
alone.' 'Oh to be sure,' cried Lady Pelham, 'do go to your friend and
favourite and make your complaint of all your harsh usage, and descant
at large upon poor Lady Pelham's unlucky failings. No, no, I promise
you, no servant of mine shall be sent on any such errand.' 'There is
fine moonlight,' said Laura looking calmly from the window, 'I dare say
I shall be safe enough alone.' 'You shall not go to Norwood!' cried Lady
Pelham--'I'll take care to keep you from that prying, censorious old
hag. You two shan't be allowed to sit primming up your mouths, and
spitting venom on all the neighbourhood.' Weary of such low abuse, Laura
took her bonnet, and was leaving the room. Lady Pelham placed herself
between her and the door. 'Where are you going?' she demanded, in a
voice in which rage was a little mingled with dread. 'To the only
shelter that England affords me,' returned Laura; 'to the only friends
from whom death or distance does not sever me.' 'I shall spoil your dish
of scandal for to-night, however,' said Lady Pelham, flouncing out of
the room; and, slapping the door with a force that made the windows
rattle, she locked it on the outside. Laura making no attempt to obtain
release, quietly sat down expecting a renewal of the charge. Soon,
however, all the household seemed still, and Laura having mingled with
the prayer that commended herself to the care of heaven, a supplication
for pardon and amendment to her aunt, retired to sound and refreshing
rest.

On quitting Laura, Lady Pelham went to bed, pride and anger in her
breast fiercely struggling against a sense of blame. But the darkness,
the silence, the loneliness of night assuage the passions even of a
termagant; and by degrees she turned from re-acting and excusing her
conduct, to fretting at its probable consequences.

The courage of a virago is no more than the daring of intoxication. Wait
till the paroxysms be past, and the timid hare is not more the slave of
fear. Lady Pelham began to feel, though she would scarcely acknowledge
it to herself, how very absurdly her contest would figure in the mouths
of the gossips round Walbourne. If her niece left her house in
displeasure, if a breach were known to subsist between them, was it not
most likely that Laura would in her own defence relate the treatment to
which she had been subjected? At all events, if she went to Norwood
before a reconciliation took place, she would certainly explain her
situation to Mrs De Courcy; and Lady Pelham could not brave the contempt
of the woman whom she disliked and abused. Anger has been compared to a
short madness, and the resemblance holds in this respect, that in both
cases, a little terror is of sovereign use in restoring quiet. Lady
Pelham even feared the calm displeasure of Laura, and shrunk from
meeting the reproving eye of even the dependent girl whom she had
persecuted and reproached and insulted. By degrees, Laura's habitual
ascendancy was completely restored, perhaps with added strength for its
momentary suspension; for she had rather gained in respectability by
patient endurance, while Lady Pelham was somewhat humbled by a sense of
misconduct. Besides, in the course of eight months residence under her
roof, Laura was become necessary to her aunt. Her prudence, her good
temper, her various domestic talents, were ever at hand to supply the
capital defects of Lady Pelham's character. Lady Pelham could not justly
be said to love any mortal, but she felt the advantages of the method
and regularity which Laura had introduced into her family; Laura's
beauty gratified her vanity; Laura's sweetness bore with her caprice;
Laura's talents amused her solitude; and she made as near an approach as
nature would permit to loving Laura. What was of more consequence, Laura
was popular in the neighbourhood; her story would be no sooner told than
believed; and Lady Pelham's lively imagination strongly represented to
her the aggravation, commentary, and sarcasm, with which such an
anecdote would be circulated.

But though these ideas floated in Lady Pelham's mind, let it not be
thought that she once supposed them to be the motives of her
determination to seek a reconcilement! No. Lady Pelham had explained,
and disguised, and adorned her failings, till she had converted the
natural shame of confession into a notion that a candid avowal atoned
for any of her errors; and no sooner did she begin to think of making
concessions to her niece, than the consciousness of blame was lost in
inward applause of her own candour and condescension. An observing eye,
therefore, would have seen more of conceit than of humility in her air,
when early in the morning, she entered Laura's apartment. Laura was
already dressed, and returned her aunt's salutation more coldly than she
had ever formerly done, though with perfect good humour. Lady Pelham
approached and took her hand; Laura did not withdraw it. 'I fear,' said
Lady Pelham, 'you think I behaved very absurdly last night.' Laura
looked down and said nothing. 'I am willing to own I was to blame,'
continued her Ladyship, 'but people of strong feelings, you know, my
dear, cannot always command themselves.' Laura was still silent. 'We
must forgive and forget the failings of our friends,' proceeded her
Ladyship. Laura, who dreaded that these overtures of peace only covered
a projected attack, still stood speechless. 'Will you not forgive me,
Laura?' said Lady Pelham coaxingly, her desire of pardon increasing, as
she began to doubt of obtaining it. 'I do, Madam,' said Laura, clasping
Lady Pelham's hand between her own. 'I do from my heart forgive all, and
if you will permit me, I will forget all--all but that when I was an
orphan, alone in the wide world, you sheltered and protected me.' 'Thank
you, my good girl,' returned Lady Pelham, sealing the reconciliation
with a kiss. 'I knew you would think it a duty to excuse an error
arising merely from my natural warmth, and the interest I take in
you--"A bad effect from a noble cause." It is a melancholy truth that
those who have the advantages of a feeling heart, must share its
weaknesses too.' Laura had so often listened to similar nonsense, that
it had ceased to provoke a smile. 'Let us talk of this no more,' said
she; 'let me rather try to persuade you not only to excuse, but to
sanction the obstinacy that offended you.' 'Ah Laura,' returned Lady
Pelham, smiling, 'I must not call you obstinate, but you are very firm.
If I could but prevail on you to go with me only for a day or two, I
should make my visit as short as you please; for now it has been all
arranged I must go, and it would look so awkward to go without you!' 'If
the length of your visit depend upon me,' answered Laura, waving a
subject on which she was determined not to forfeit her character for
firmness, 'it shall be short indeed, for I shall long to offer some
reparation for all my late perverseness and disobedience.'

At another time Lady Pelham's temper would have failed her at this
steady opposition of her will; but fear kept her in check. After a few
very gentle expostulations, she gave up the point, and inquired whether
her niece still intended to spend the time of her absence at Norwood.
Laura answered that she did; and had promised to breakfast there that
morning. Upon this Lady Pelham overwhelmed her with such caresses and
endearments, as she intended should obliterate the remembrance of her
late injurious behaviour. She extolled Laura's prudence, her sweet and
forgiving disposition, her commendable reserve with strangers, and her
caution in speaking of herself or of her own affairs. Unfortunately for
the effect of the flattery, Laura recollected that some of these
qualities had at times been the subject of Lady Pelham's severe
reprehension. She had, besides, sufficient penetration to detect the
motive of her Ladyship's altered language; and she strove to suppress a
feeling of contempt, while she replied to her aunt's thoughts as freely
as if they had been frankly spoken; assuring her that she should be far
from publishing to strangers the casual vexations of her domestic life.
Lady Pelham reddened, as her latent thoughts were thus seized and
exposed naked to her view; but fear again proved victorious, and she
redoubled her blandishments. She even had recourse to a new expedient,
and for the first time made Laura an offer of money. With infinite
difficulty did Laura suppress the indignation which swelled her breast.
She had forgiven abuse and insult, but it was beyond endurance that her
aunt should suppose that her pardon and silence might be bought.
Restraining her anger, however, she positively refused the money; and
bidding Lady Pelham farewell, departed, amidst pressing injunctions to
remain at Norwood no longer than till her aunt returned to Walbourne;
her Ladyship protesting that her own home would not be endurable for an
hour without the company of her dear Laura.

Lady Pelham unwillingly set out on a journey of which the first
intention had been totally defeated; but she had no alternative, since,
besides having promised to visit Mrs Bathurst, she had made an
appointment to meet Hargrave at the stage where she was to stop for the
night, and it was now too late to give him warning of his
disappointment. Even Hargrave's politeness was no match for his
vexation, when he saw Lady Pelham, late in the evening, alight from her
carriage, unaccompanied by Laura. He listened with impatience to her
Ladyship's apology and confused explanations; and more than half
resolved upon returning to -- to carry on his operations there. But he
too had promised to Mrs Bathurst, whom for particular reasons he wished
not to disoblige. The travellers, therefore, next day pursued their
journey to Derham Green, beguiling the way by joint contrivances to
conquer the stubbornness of Laura.




CHAPTER XXVII


Laura had proceeded but a short way towards Norwood when she was met by
De Courcy, who, with a manner the most opposite to his coldness on the
preceding day, sprang forward to meet her, his countenance radiant with
pleasure. Laura, delighted with the change, playfully reproached him
with his caprice. Montague coloured, but defended himself with spirit;
and a dialogue, more resembling flirtation than any in which Laura had
ever engaged, occupied them till, as they loitered along the dark avenue
of Norwood, a shade of the sentimental began to mingle with their
conversation. De Courcy had that morning resolved, firmly resolved, that
while Laura was his guest at Norwood, he would avoid a declaration of
his sentiments. Convinced, as he now was, that he no longer had any
thing to fear from the perseverance of Hargrave, he was yet far from
being confident of his own success. On the contrary, he was persuaded
that he had hitherto awakened in Laura no sentiment beyond friendship,
and that she must become accustomed to him as a lover, before he could
hope for any farther grace. He considered how embarrassing would be her
situation in a house of which the master was a repulsed, perhaps a
rejected, admirer; and he had determined not to hazard embittering to
her a residence from which she had at present no retreat. Yet the
confiding manner, the bewitching loveliness of Laura, the stillness,
shade, and solitude of their path had half-beguiled him of his prudence,
when, fortunately for his resolution, he saw Harriet advancing to meet
her friend. Harriet's liveliness soon restored gaiety to the
conversation; and the party proceeded less leisurely than before to
Norwood, where Laura was received with affectionate cordiality by Mrs De
Courcy.

Never had the time appeared to Laura to fly so swiftly as now. Every
hour was sacred to improvement, to elegance, or to benevolence. Laura
had a mind capable of intense application; and therefore could exalt
relaxation into positive enjoyment. But the pleasure which a vigorous
understanding takes in the exercise of its powers, was now heightened in
her hours of study, by the assistance, the approbation of De Courcy; and
the hours of relaxation he enlivened by a manner which, at once frank
and respectful, spirited and kind, seemed peculiarly fitted to adorn the
domestic circle. A part of each day was employed by Mrs De Courcy in
various works of charity; and, joining in these, Laura returned with
satisfaction to a habit which she had unwillingly laid aside during her
residence in London, and but imperfectly resumed at Walbourne. Amiable,
rational, and pious, the family at Norwood realized all Laura's
day-dreams of social happiness; and the only painful feeling that
assailed her mind arose from the recollection that the time of her visit
was fast stealing away. Her visit was, however, prolonged by a fortunate
cold which detained Lady Pelham at Derham Green; and Laura could not
regret an accident which delayed her separation from her friends. Indeed
she began to dread Lady Pelham's return, both as the signal of her
departure from Norwood, and as a prelude to the renewal of her
persecutions on account of Hargrave. Far from having, as Lady Pelham had
insinuated, renounced his pursuit, he returned in a few days from Mrs
Bathurst's; again established himself with Lambert; and, though he could
not uninvited intrude himself into Norwood, contrived to beset Laura as
often as she passed its bounds. In the few visits which she paid, she
generally encountered him; and he regularly waylaid her at church. But
he had lost an able coadjutor in Lady Pelham; and now, when no one
present was concerned to assist his designs, and when Laura was
protected by kind and considerate friends, she generally found means to
escape his officious attentions; though, remembering his former jealousy
of Montague, and the irritability of his temper, she was scrupulously
cautious of marking her preference of De Courcy, or of appearing to take
sanctuary with him from the assiduities of Hargrave. Indeed,
notwithstanding the mildness of De Courcy's disposition, she was not
without fear that he might be involved in a quarrel by the unreasonable
suspicions of Hargrave, who had often taxed her with receiving his
addresses, ascribing his own failure to their success. She had in vain
condescended to assure him that the charge was groundless. He never met
De Courcy without shewing evident marks of dislike. If he accosted him,
it was in a tone and manner approaching to insult. The most trivial
sentence which De Courcy addressed to Laura, drew from Hargrave looks of
enmity and defiance; while Montague, on his part, returned these
aggressions by a cool disdain, the most opposite to the conciliating
frankness of his general manners. Laura's alarm lest Hargrave's
ill-concealed aversion should burst into open outrage, completed the
dread with which he inspired her; and she felt like one subjected to the
thraldom of an evil genius, when he one day announced to her that he had
procured leave to remove his regiment to --; in order, as he said, 'that
he might be at hand to assert his rights over her.'

He conveyed this information as, rudely preventing Mr Bolingbroke and De
Courcy, he led her from Mrs De Courcy's carriage into church. Laura
durst not challenge his presumptuous expression, for Montague was close
by her side, and she dreaded that his aversion to arrogance and
oppression should induce him to engage in her quarrel. Silently
therefore, though glowing with resentment, she suffered Hargrave to
retain the place he had usurped, while Montague followed, with a
countenance which a few short moments had clouded with sudden care.
'Ah,' thought he, 'those rights must indeed be strong which he dares
thus boldly, thus publickly assert.' It was some time ere the service
began, and Laura could not help casting glances of kind inquiry on the
saddened face, which, a few minutes before, she had seen bright with
animation and delight. Hargrave's eye followed her's with a far
different expression. While she observed him darting a scowl of malice
and aversion on the man to whom he owed his life, Laura shuddered; and
wondering at the infatuation which had so long disguised his true
character, bent her head, acknowledged her short-sightedness, and
resigned the future events of her life to the disposal of heaven. It was
the day immediately preceding Harriet's marriage, and neither she nor
Mrs De Courcy was in church; Laura therefore returned home tête à tête
with Montague. Ignorant that Hargrave's provoking half-whisper had been
overheard by De Courcy, she could not account for the sudden change in
his countenance and manner; yet though she took an affectionate interest
in his melancholy, they had almost reached home before she summoned
courage to inquire into its cause. 'I fear you are indisposed,' said she
to him in a voice of kind concern. De Courcy thanked her. 'No, not
indisposed,' said he, with a faint smile. 'Disturbed, then,' said Laura.
De Courcy was silent for a moment, and then taking her hand, said, 'May
I be candid with you?' 'Surely,' returned Laura. 'I trust I shall ever
meet with candour in you.' 'Then I will own,' resumed De Courcy, 'that I
am disturbed. And can the friend of Montreville be otherwise when he
hears a right claimed over you by one so wholly unworthy of you?' 'Ah,'
cried Laura, 'you have then heard all. I hoped you had not attended to
him.' 'Attended!' exclaimed De Courcy, 'Could any right be claimed over
you and I be regardless?' 'It were ungrateful to doubt your friendly
interest in me,' replied Laura. 'Believe me Colonel Hargrave has no
right over me, nor ever shall have.' 'Yet I did not hear you resist the
claim,' returned De Courcy. 'Because,' answered Laura, 'I feared to draw
your attention. His violence terrifies me, and I feared that--that you
might'--She hesitated, stopped, and blushed very deeply. She felt the
awkwardness of appearing to expect that De Courcy should engage in a
quarrel on her account, but the simple truth ever rose so naturally to
her lips, that she could not even qualify it without confusion. 'Might
what?' cried De Courcy eagerly; 'Speak frankly I beseech you.' 'I
feared,' replied Laura, recovering herself, 'that the interest you take
in the daughter of your friend might expose you to the rudeness of this
overbearing man.' 'And did you upon my account, dearest Laura, submit to
this insolence?' cried De Courcy, his eyes sparkling with exultation.
'Is my honour, my safety then dear to you? Could you think of me even
while Hargrave spoke!' With surprise and displeasure Laura read the
triumphant glance which accompanied his words. 'Is it possible,' thought
she, 'that, well as he knows me, he can thus mistake the nature of my
regard! or can he, attached to another, find pleasure in the idle dream.
Oh man! thou art altogether vanity!' Snatching away the hand which he
was pressing to his lips, she coldly replied, 'I should have been
equally attentive to the safety of any common stranger had I expected
his interference, and Colonel Hargrave's speeches cannot divert my
attention even from the most trivial object in nature.' Poor De Courcy,
his towering hopes suddenly levelled with the dust, shrunk from the
frozen steadiness of her eye. 'Pardon me, Miss Montreville,' said he in
a tone of mingled sorrow and reproach, 'pardon me for the hope that you
would make any distinction between me and the most indifferent. I shall
soon be cured of my presumption.' Grieved at the pain she saw she had
occasioned, Laura would fain have said something to mitigate the repulse
which she had given: but a new light began to dawn upon her, and she
feared to conciliate the friend lest she should encourage the lover.
Fortunately for the relief of her embarrassment the carriage stopped. De
Courcy gravely and in silence handed her from it; and, hurrying to her
chamber, she sat down to reconsider the dialogue she had just ended.

De Courcy's manner more than his words recalled a suspicion which she
had oftener than once driven from her mind. She was impressed, she
scarcely knew why, with a conviction that she was beloved. For some
minutes this idea alone filled her thoughts; the next that succeeded was
recollection that she ought sincerely to lament a passion which she
could not return. It was her duty to be sorry, very sorry indeed, for
such an accident; to be otherwise would have argued the most selfish
vanity, the most hard-hearted ingratitude towards the best of friends,
and the most amiable of mankind. Yet she was not _very_ sorry; it was
out of her power to convince herself that she was; so she imputed her
philosophy under her misfortune to doubtfulness of its existence. 'But
after all,' said she to herself, 'his words could not bear such a
construction; and for his manner--who would build any thing upon a
manner! While a woman's vanity is so apt to deceive her, what rational
creature would give credit to what may owe so much to her own
imagination! Besides, did not Mrs De Courcy more than hint that his
affections were engaged. Did he not even himself confess to me that they
were. And I taxed him with vanity!--Truly, if he could see this
ridiculous freak of mine he might very justly retort the charge. And see
it he will. What could possess me with my absurd prudery to take offence
at his expecting that I, who owe him ten thousand kind offices, should
be anxious for his safety?--How could I be so false, so thankless as to
say I considered him as a common acquaintance?--The friend of my father,
my departed father! the friend who supported him in want, and consoled
him in sorrow! No wonder that he seemed shocked! What is so painful to a
noble heart as to meet with ingratitude? But he shall never again have
reason to think me vain or ungrateful;' and Laura hastened down stairs
that she might lose no time in convincing De Courcy that she did not
suspect him of being her lover, and highly valued him as a friend. She
found him in the drawing-room, pensively resting his forehead against
the window sash; and approaching him, spoke some trifle with a smile so
winning, so gracious, that De Courcy soon forgot both his wishes and his
fears, enjoyed the present, and was happy.

The day of Harriet's marriage arrived; and for once she was grave and
silent. She even forgot her bridal finery; and when Laura went to inform
her of Mr Bolingbroke's arrival, she found her in the library, sitting
on the ground in tears, her head resting on the seat of an old-fashioned
elbow chair. She sprang up as Laura entered; and dashing the drops from
her eyes, cried, 'I have been trying to grow young again for a few
minutes, before I am made an old woman for life. Just there I used to
sit when I was a little little thing, and laid my head upon my father's
knee; for this was his favourite chair, and there old Rover and I used
to lie at his feet together. I'll beg this chair of my mother, for now I
love every thing at Norwood.' Laura drew her away, and she forgot the
old elbow-chair when she saw the superb diamonds which were lying on her
dressing-table. The ceremonial of the wedding was altogether adjusted by
Mrs Penelope; and though, in compliance with Mr Bolingbroke's whims, she
suffered the ceremony to be privately performed, she invited every
creature who could claim kindred with the names of Bolingbroke or De
Courcy to meet and welcome the young bride to her home. Mr Bolingbroke
having brought a licence, the pair were united at Norwood. Mr Wentworth
officiated, and De Courcy gave his sister away. Mrs Bolingbroke's own
new barouche, so often beheld in fancy, now really waited to convey her
to her future dwelling; but she turned to bid farewell to the domestics
who had attended her infancy, and forgot to look at the new barouche.

Mr Bolingbroke was a great man, and could not be allowed to marry
quietly. Bonfires were lighted, bells were rung, and a concourse of his
tenantry accompanied the carriages which conveyed the party. The
admiration of the company whom Mrs Penelope had assembled in honour of
the day, was divided between Mrs Bolingbroke's diamonds and her
bride-maid; and as the number of each sex was pretty equal, the wonders
shared pretty equally.

'Did you ever see any thing so lovely as Miss Montreville?' said Sophia
Bolingbroke to the young lady who sat next her. 'I never can think any
body pretty who has red hair,' was the reply. 'If her hair be red,'
returned Sophia, 'it is the most pardonable red hair in the world, for
it is more nearly black. Don't you admire her figure?' 'Not
particularly; she is too much of the May-pole for me; besides, who can
tell what her figure is when she is so muffled up. I dare say she is
stuffed, or she would shew a little more of her skin.' 'She has at least
an excellent taste in stuffing, then,' said Sophia, 'for I never saw any
thing so elegantly formed.' 'It is easy to see,' said the critic, 'that
she thinks herself a beauty by her dressing so affectedly. To-night
when every body else is in full dress, do but look at her's!' 'Pure,
unadorned, virgin white,' said Miss Bolingbroke, looking at Laura; 'the
proper attire of angels!' The name of Miss Montreville had drawn the
attention of De Courcy to this dialogue. 'I protest,' cried he to Mr
Wentworth, who stood by him. 'Sophy Bolingbroke is the most agreeable
plain girl I ever saw.' He then placed himself by her side; and while
she continued to praise Laura, gave her credit for all that is most
amiable in woman.

The moment he left her she ran to rally Laura upon her conquest. 'I give
you joy, my dear,' said she, 'De Courcy is certainly in love with you.'
'Nonsense,' cried Laura, colouring crimson; 'what can make you think
so?' 'Why he will talk of nothing but you, and he looked so delighted
when I praised you; and paid me more compliments in half an hour than
ere I received in my whole life before.' 'If he was so complimentary,'
said Laura, smiling, 'it seems more likely that he is in love with you.'
'Ah,' said Sophia, sighing, 'that is not very probable.' 'Full as
probable as the other,' answered Laura; and turned away to avoid a
subject which she was striving to banish from her thoughts.

During the few days which Laura and the De Courcys spent with the
newly-married pair, Miss Bolingbroke's observations served to confirm
her opinion; and merely for the pleasure of speaking of Montague, she
rallied Laura incessantly on her lover. In weighing credibilities, small
weight of testimony turns the scale; and Laura began alternately to
wonder what retarded De Courcy's declaration, and to tax herself with
vanity in expecting that he would ever make one. She disliked her stay
at Orfordhall, and counted the hours till her return to Norwood. De
Courcy's attentions she had long placed to the account of a regard
which, while she was permitted to give it the name of friendship, she
could frankly own that she valued above any earthly possessions. These
attentions were now so familiar to her, that they were become almost
necessary, and she was vexed at being constantly reminded that she ought
to reject them. She had therefore a latent wish to return to a place
where she would have a legitimate claim to his kindness, and where at
least there would be no one to remind her that she ought to shrink from
it. Besides, she was weary of the state and magnificence that surrounded
her. While Harriet glided into the use of her finery as if she had been
accustomed to it from her cradle, Laura could by no means be reconciled
to it. She endured with impatience a meal of three hours long; could
not eat while six footmen were staring at her; started, if she
thoughtlessly leant her head against the white damask wall; and could
not move with ease, where every gesture was repeated in endless
looking-glasses. With pleasure, therefore, she saw the day arrive which
was to restore her to easy hospitality, and respectable simplicity at
Norwood; but that very day she received a summons to attend her aunt at
Walbourne.

Unwilling as Laura was to quit her friends, she did not delay to comply
with Lady Pelham's requisition. Mrs De Courcy judged it improper to urge
her to stay; and Montague in part consoled himself for her departure, by
reflecting, that he would now be at liberty to disclose his
long-concealed secret. 'No doubt you are at liberty,' said Mrs De
Courcy, when he spoke to her of his intentions, 'and I am far from
pretending to advise or interfere. But, my dear Montague, you must
neither be surprised, nor in despair, if you be at first unsuccessful.
Though Laura esteems you, perhaps more than esteems you, she is
convinced that she is invulnerable to love; and it may be so, but her
fancied security is all in your favour.' Weary of suspense, however, De
Courcy often resolved to know his fate; and often went to Walbourne,
determined to learn ere he returned, whether a circle of pleasing duties
was to fill his after life, or whether it was to be spent alone,
'loveless, joyless, unendeared;' but when he met the friendly smile of
Laura, and remembered that, his secret told, it might vanish like the
gleaming of a wintry sun, his courage failed, and the intended
disclosure was again delayed. Yet his manner grew less and less
equivocal, and Laura, unwilling as she was to own the conviction to
herself, could scarcely maintain her wilful blindness.

She allowed the subject to occupy the more of her thoughts, because it
came disguised in a veil of self-condemnation and humility. Sometimes
she repeated to herself, that she should never have known the vanity of
her own heart, had it not been visited by so absurd a suspicion; and
sometimes that she should never have been acquainted with its
selfishness and obduracy, had she not borne with such indifference, the
thoughts of what must bring pain and disappointment to so worthy a
breast. But, spite of Laura's efforts to be miserable, the subject cost
her much more perplexity than distress; and, in wondering whether De
Courcy really were her lover, and what could be his motive for
concealing it if he were, she often forgot to deplore the consequences
of her charms.

Meanwhile Hargrave continued his importunities; and Lady Pelham seconded
them with unwearied perseverance. In vain did Laura protest that her
indifference was unconquerable; in vain assure him that though a total
revolution in his character might regain her esteem, her affection was
irrecoverably lost. She could at any time exasperate the proud spirit of
Hargrave, till in transports of fury he would abjure her for ever; but a
few hours always brought the 'for ever' to an end, and Hargrave back, to
supplicate, to importune, and not unfrequently to threaten. Though her
unremitting coldness, however, failed to conquer his passion, it by
degrees extinguished all of generous or kindly that had ever mingled
with the flame; and the wild unholy fire which her beauty kept alive,
was blended with the heart-burnings of anger and revenge. From such a
passion Laura shrunk with dread and horror. She heard its expressions as
superstitution listens to sounds of evil omen; and saw his impassioned
glances with the dread of one who meets the eye of the crouching tiger.
His increasing jealousy of De Courcy, which testified itself in
haughtiness, and even ferocity of behaviour towards him, and Montague's
determined though cool resistance of his insolence, kept her in
continual alarm. Though she never on any other occasion voluntarily
entered Hargrave's presence, yet if De Courcy found him at Walbourne,
she would hasten to join them, fearing the consequences of a private
interview between two such hostile spirits; and this apparent preference
not only aggravated the jealousy of Hargrave, but aroused Lady Pelham's
indefatigable spirit of remonstrance. The subject was particularly
suited for an episode to her Ladyship's harangues in favour of Hargrave;
and she introduced and varied it with a dexterity all her own. She taxed
Laura with a passion for De Courcy; and in terms not eminently delicate,
reproached her with facility in transferring her regards. While the
charge was privately made, it appeared to Laura too groundless to affect
her temper. But Lady Pelham, whose whole life might be said to form one
grand experiment upon the powers of provocation, took occasion to rally
her upon it before some of her companions; hinting not obscurely at the
secret which Laura had so religiously kept, and confessed with so much
pain. The attempt was partly successful, for Laura was really angry; but
she commanded herself so far as to parry the attack, secretly vowing
that her candour should never again commit her to the discretion of Lady
Pelham.

Sometimes assuming the tone of a tender monitress, Lady Pelham would
affect to be seriously convinced that her niece entertained a passion
for De Courcy, and treating all Laura's denials as the effect of maiden
timidity, would pretend to sympathize in her sufferings, advising her to
use her strength of mind to conquer this unfortunate partiality; to
transfer her affections from one to whom they appeared valueless to him
who sued for them with such interesting perseverance. Above all, she
entreated her to avoid the appearance of making advances to a man who
probably never bestowed a thought on her in return; thus intimating that
Laura's behaviour might bear so provoking a construction. Laura,
sometimes irritated, oftener amused by these impertinences, could have
endured them with tolerable patience; but they were mere interludes to
Lady Pelham's indefatigable chidings on the subject of Hargrave. These
were continued with a zeal and industry worthy of better success. And
yet they could not be said to be wholly unsuccessful, while, though they
could not persuade, they could torment. In vain did Laura recount the
reasons which, even amidst the utmost strength of inclination, would
have deterred her from a connection with a person of Hargrave's
character. To reason with Lady Pelham was a labour at once severe and
unavailing. She was so dexterous in the use of indefinite language, so
practised in every art of shift and evasion, that the strongest argument
failed to conquer; or if forced from her ground, she on the next
occasion occupied it again, just as if she had always maintained it
undisputed. Remonstrance and entreaty were not more successful. In
defiance of both, Lady Pelham continued to ring endless changes on the
same endless theme, till Laura's patience would have failed her, had she
not been consoled by reflecting that the time now drew near when the
payment of her annuity would enable her to escape from her unwearied
persecutors. She heartily wished, however, that a change of system might
make her residence with Lady Pelham endurable; for strong as was her
attachment to Mrs Douglas, it was no longer her only friendship; and she
could not without pain think of quitting, perhaps for ever, her valued
friends at Norwood.

Winter advanced; Lady Pelham began to talk of her removal to town; and
Laura was not without hopes, that when removed to a distance from
Hargrave, her aunt would remit somewhat of her diligence in his cause.
Laura expected that his duty would generally confine him to
head-quarters, and she hoped to find in his absence a respite from one
half of her plague. At all events, from London she thought she could
easily procure an escort to Scotland, and she was determined rather
finally to forfeit the protection of Lady Pelham, than submit to such
annoyance as she had of late endured. Laura could not help wondering
sometimes that her aunt, while she appeared so anxious to promote the
success of Hargrave, should meditate a step which would place him at a
distance from the object of his pursuit; but Lady Pelham's conduct was
so generally inconsistent, that Laura was weary of trying to reconcile
its contradictories. She endeavoured to hope that Lady Pelham, at last
becoming sensible of the inefficacy of her efforts, was herself growing
desirous to escape the Colonel's importunity; and she thought she could
observe, that as the time of their departure approached, her Ladyship
relaxed somewhat of her industry in teazing.

But the motives of Lady Pelham's removal did not at all coincide with
her niece's hopes; and nothing could be further from her intention, than
to resign her labours in a field so rich in controversy and provocation.
She imagined that Laura's obstinacy was occasioned, or at least
strengthened by the influence of the De Courcys, and she expected that a
more general acquaintance with the world would remove her prejudices. At
Walbourne, Laura, if offended, could always take refuge with Mrs De
Courcy. In London, she would be more defenceless. At Walbourne, Lady
Pelham acted under restraint, for there were few objects to divide with
her the observation of her neighbours, and she felt herself accountable
to them for the propriety of her conduct; but she would be more at
liberty in a place where, each immersed in his own business or pleasure,
no one had leisure to comment on the concerns of others. She knew that
Hargrave would find means to escape the duty of remaining with his
regiment, and indeed had concerted with him the whole plan of her
operations.

Meanwhile Laura, altogether unsuspicious of their designs, gladly
prepared for her journey, considering it as a fortunate instance of the
instability of Lady Pelham's purposes. She paid a parting visit to Mrs
Bolingbroke, whom she found established in quiet possession of all the
goods of fortune. By the aid of Mrs De Courcy's carriage, she contrived,
without molestation from Hargrave, to spend much of her time at Norwood,
where she was always received with a kindness the most flattering, and
loaded with testimonies of regard. De Courcy still kept his secret; and
Laura's suspicions rather diminished when she considered that, though he
knew she was to go without any certainty of returning, he suffered
numberless opportunities to pass without breathing a syllable of love.

The day preceding that which was fixed for the journey arrived; and
Laura begged Lady Pelham's permission to spend it entirely with Mrs De
Courcy. Lady Pelham was rather unwilling to consent, for she remembered
that her last excursion had been rendered abortive by a visit to
Norwood; but, flattering herself that her present scheme was secure from
hazard of failure, she assumed an accommodating humour, and not only
permitted Laura to go but allowed the carriage to convey her,
stipulating that she should return it immediately, and walk home in the
evening. She found the De Courcys alone, and passed the day less
cheerfully than any she had ever spent at Norwood. Mrs De Courcy, though
kind, was grave and thoughtful; Montague absent, and melancholy.
Harriet's never-failing spirits no longer enlivened the party, and her
place was but feebly supplied by the infantine gaiety of De Courcy's
little protegé Henry. This child, who was the toy of all his patron's
leisure hours, had, during her visits to Norwood, become particularly
interesting to Laura. His quickness, his uncommon beauty, his engaging
frankness, above all, the innocent fondness which he shewed for her, had
really attached her to him, and he repaid her with all the affections of
his little heart. He would quit his toys to hang upon her; and, though
at other times, as restless as any of his kind, was never weary of
sitting quietly on her knee, clasping her snowy neck in his little
sun-burnt arms. His prattle agreeably interrupted the taciturnity into
which the little party were falling, till his grandfather came to take
him away. 'Kiss your hand Henry, and bid Miss Montreville farewell,'
said the old man as he was about to take him from Laura's arms. 'It will
be a long time before you see her again.' 'Are you going away?' said the
child, looking sorrowfully in Laura's face. 'Yes, far away,' answered
Laura. 'Then Henry will go with you, Henry's dear pretty lady.' 'No no,'
said his grandfather. 'You must go to your mammy; good boys love their
mammies best.' 'Then you ought to be Henry's mammy,' cried the child,
sobbing, and locking his arms round Laura's neck, 'for Henry loves you
best.' 'My dear boy!' cried Laura, kissing him with a smile that
half-consented to his wish; but, happening to turn her eye towards De
Courcy, she saw him change colour, and, with an abruptness unlike his
usual manner, he snatched the boy from her arms, and, regardless of his
cries, dismissed him from the room.

This little incident did not contribute to the cheerfulness of the
group. Grieved to part with her favourite, and puzzled to account for De
Courcy's behaviour, Laura was now the most silent of the trio. She saw
nothing in the childish expression of fondness which should have moved
De Courcy; yet it had evidently stung him with sudden uneasiness. She
now recollected that she had more than once inquired who were the
parents of this child, and that the question had always been evaded. A
motive of curiosity prompted her now to repeat her inquiry, and she
addressed it to Mrs De Courcy. With a slight shade of embarrassment Mrs
De Courcy answered, 'His mother was the only child of our old servant; a
pretty, meek-spirited, unfortunate girl; and his father'--'His father's
crimes,' interrupted De Courcy, hastily, 'have brought their own
punishment; a punishment beyond mortal fortitude to bear;'--and,
catching up a book, he asked Laura whether she had seen it, endeavouring
to divert her attention by pointing out some passages to her notice.
Laura's curiosity was increased by this appearance of concealment, but
she had no means of gratifying it, and the subject vanished from her
mind when she thought of bidding farewell to her beloved friends,
perhaps for ever.

When she was about to go, Mrs De Courcy affectionately embraced her. 'My
dear child,' said she, 'second in my love and esteem only to my own
Montague, almost the warmest wish of my heart is to retain you always
with me; but, if that is impossible, short may your absence be, and may
you return to us as joyfully as we shall receive you.' Weeping, and
reluctant to part, Laura at last tore herself away. Hargrave had so
often stolen upon her walks that the fear of meeting him was become
habitual to her, and she wished to escape him by reaching home before
her return could be expected. As she leant on De Courcy's arms, ashamed
of being unable to suppress her sensibility, she averted her head, and
looked sadly back upon a dwelling endeared to her by many an innocent,
many a rational pleasure.

Absorbed in her regrets, Laura had proceeded a considerable way before
she observed that she held a trembling arm; and recollected that De
Courcy had scarcely spoken since their walk began. Her tears ceased
suddenly, while confused and disquieted, she quickened her pace. Soon
recollecting herself, she stopped; and thanking him for his escort,
begged that he would go no further. 'I cannot leave you yet,' said De
Courcy in a voice of restrained emotion, and again he led her onwards. A
few short sentences were all that passed till they had almost reached
the antique gate which terminated the winding part of the avenue. Here
Laura again endeavoured to prevail upon her companion to return, but
without success. With more composure than before, he refused to leave
her. Dreading to encounter Hargrave while De Courcy was in such evident
agitation, she besought him to go, telling him that it was her
particular wish that he should proceed no farther. He instantly stopped,
and, clasping her hand between his, 'Must I then leave you, Laura,' said
he; 'you whose presence has so long been the charm of my existence!' The
blood rushed violently into Laura's face, and as suddenly retired. 'And
can I,' continued De Courcy, 'can I suffer you to go without pouring out
my full heart to you?' Laura breathed painfully, and she pressed her
hand upon her bosom to restrain its swelling. 'To talk to you of
passion,' resumed De Courcy, 'is nothing. You have twined yourself with
every wish and every employment, every motive, every hope, till to part
with you is tearing my heart-strings.' Again he paused. Laura felt that
she was expected to reply, and, though trembling and breathless, made an
effort to speak. 'This is what I feared,' said she, 'and yet I wish you
had been less explicit, for there is no human being whose friendship is
so dear to me as yours; and now I fear I ought'--The sob which had been
struggling in her breast now choked her utterance, and she wept aloud.
'It is the will of heaven,' said she, 'that I should be reft of every
earthly friend.' She covered her face and stood labouring to compose
herself; while, heart-struck with a disappointment which was not
mitigated by all the gentleness with which it was conveyed, De Courcy
was unable to break the silence.

'Ungrateful! selfish that I am,' exclaimed Laura suddenly dashing the
tears from her eyes, 'thus to think only of my own loss, while I am
giving pain to the worthiest of hearts.--My best friend, I cannot indeed
return the regard with which you honour me, but I can make you cease to
wish that I should. And I deserve the shame and anguish I shall suffer.
She, whom you honour with your love,' continued she, the burning crimson
glowing in her face and neck, 'has been the sport of a passion, strong
as disgraceful--disgraceful as its object is worthless.'

Her look, her voice, her manner conveyed to De Courcy the strongest idea
of the torture which this confession cost her; and no sufferings of his
own could make him insensible to those of Laura. 'Cease, cease,' he
cried, 'best and dearest of women, do not add to my wretchedness the
thought of giving pain to you.' Then, after a few moments pause, he
continued, 'it would be wronging your noble candour to doubt that you
have recalled your affections.' 'In doing so,' answered Laura, 'I can
claim no merit. Infatuation itself could have been blind no longer.'
'Then why, dearest Laura,' cried De Courcy, his heart again bounding
with hope, 'why may not time and the fond assiduities of love'--'Ah!'
interrupted Laura, 'that is impossible. A mere preference I might give
you, but I need not tell you that I have no more to give.' 'My heavenly
Laura,' cried De Courcy, eager joy beaming in his eyes, 'give me but
this preference, and I would not exchange it for the fondest passion of
woman-kind.' 'You deceive yourself,' said Laura mournfully, 'miserably
deceive yourself. Such a sentiment could never content you. You would
miss a thousand little arts of happiness which love alone can teach;
observe a thousand nameless coldnesses which no caution could conceal;
and you would be unhappy without knowing perhaps of what to complain.
You, who would deserve the warmest affection to be content with mere
endurance! Oh no, I should be wretched in the bare thought of offering
you so poor a return.'

'Endurance, Laura! I should indeed be a monster to find joy in any thing
which you could describe by such a word. But must I despair of awakening
such affection as will make duty delightful, such as will enjoy the
bliss which it bestows?'

'Believe me, my dear friend,' said Laura in a voice as sweet, as
soothing, as ever conveyed the tenderest confession, 'believe me I am
not insensible to the value of your regard. It adds a new debt of
gratitude to all that Montreville's daughter owes you. My highest esteem
shall ever be yours, but after what I have confided to you, a moment's
consideration must convince you that all beyond is impossible.' 'Ah!'
thought De Courcy, 'what will it cost me to believe that it is indeed
impossible.' But Laura's avowal was not quite so fatal to his hopes as
she imagined; and while she supposed that he was summoning fortitude to
endure their final destruction, he stood silently pondering Mrs De
Courcy's oft repeated counsel to let love borrow the garb of friendship,
nor suffer him undisguised to approach the heart where, having once been
dethroned as an usurper, all was in arms against him.

'If I must indeed renounce every dearer hope,' resumed he, 'then in your
friendship, my ever dear Miss Montreville, I must seek the happiness of
my after-life, and surely'--'Oh no,' interrupted Laura, 'that must not
be--the part, the little part of your happiness which will depend upon
earthly connections, you must find in that of some fortunate woman who
has yet a heart to give.' 'How can you name it to me?' cried De Courcy
half indignantly! 'Can he who has known you Laura, admired in you all
that is noble, loved in you all that is enchanting, transfer his heart
to some common-place being?--You are my business--you are my pleasure--I
toil but to be worthy of you--your approbation is my sweetest
reward--all earthly things are precious to me but as you share in
them--even a better world borrows hope from you. And is this a love to
be bestowed on some soulless thing? No, Laura, I cannot, I will not
change. If I cannot win your love, I will admit no substitute but your
friendship.'

'Indeed, Mr De Courcy,' cried Laura, unconsciously pressing, in the
energy of speech, the hand which held hers. 'Indeed it is to no
common-place woman that I wish to resign you. Lonely as my own life must
be, its chief pleasures must arise from the happiness of my friends, and
to know that you are happy.'--Laura stopped, for she felt her own voice
grow tremulous. 'But we will not talk of this now,' resumed she, 'I
shall be absent for some months at least, and in that time you will
bring yourself to think differently. Promise me at least to make the
attempt.'

'No, Laura,' answered De Courcy, 'that I cannot promise. I will never
harass you with importunity or complaint, but the love of you shall be
my heart's treasure, it shall last though life--beyond life--and if you
cannot love me, give in return only such kind thoughts as you would
bestow on one who would promote your happiness at the expence of his
own. And promise me, dearest Laura, that when we meet, you will not
receive me with suspicion or reserve, as if you feared that I should
presume on your favour, or persecute you with solicitations. Trust to my
honour, trust to my love itself for sparing you all unavailing entreaty.
Promise me then, ever to consider me as a friend, a faithful tender
friend; and forget, till my weakness reminds you of it, that ever you
knew me as a lover.'

'Ah, Mr De Courcy,' cried Laura, tears filling her eyes, 'what thoughts
but the kindest can I ever have of him who comforted my father's
sorrows, who relieved--in a manner that made relief indeed a
kindness--relieved my father's wants? And what suspicion, what coldness
can I ever feel towards him whom my father loved and honoured! Yes I
will trust you; for I know that you are as far above owing favours to
compassion as to fear.'

'A thousand thanks, beloved Laura,' cried De Courcy, kissing her hands,
'and thus I seal our compact. One thing more; shall I trespass on your
noble frankness, if I ask you whether, had not another stolen the
blessing, I might have hoped to awaken a warmer regard? whether any
labour, any cares could have won for me what he has forfeited?'

Silent and blushing, Laura stood for a few moments with her eyes fixed
on the ground, then raising them, said, 'From you I fear no wrong
construction of my words, and will frankly own to you that for my own
sake, as well as yours, I wish you had been known to me ere the serpent
wound me in his poisoned folds. I believe, indeed, that no mortal but
himself could have inspired the same--what shall I call an infatuation
with which reason had nothing to do. But you have the virtues which I
have been taught to love, and--and--But what avails it now? I _was_
indeed a social creature; domestic habits, domestic wishes strong in me.
But what avails it now!'

'And was there a time when you could have loved me, Laura? Blessings on
you for the concession. It shall cheer my exiled heart when you are far
distant; sooth me with delightful day-dreams of what might have been;
and give my solitude a charm which none but you could bring to the most
social hour.'

'Your solitude, my honoured friend,' replied Laura, 'needs it not; it
has better and nobler charms; the charms of usefulness, of piety; and
long may these form your business and delight. But what makes me linger
with you. I meant to have hastened home that I might avoid one as unlike
to you as confidence is to fear; the feelings which you each
inspire--Farewell. I trust I shall soon hear that you are well and
happy.'

Loath to part, De Courcy endeavoured to detain her while he again gave
utterance to his strong affection; and when she would be gone, bade her
farewell in language so solemn, so tender, that all her self-command
could not repress the tears which trickled down her cheeks. They parted;
he followed her to beg that she would think of him sometimes. Again she
left him; again he had some little boon to crave. She reached the gate,
and looking back saw De Courcy standing motionless where she had last
quitted him. She beckoned a farewell. The gate closed after her, and De
Courcy felt as if one blank dreary waste had blotted the fair face of
nature.




CHAPTER XXVIII


The evening was closing, when Laura proceeded on her way. She had
outstaid her purposed time, and from every bush by the path side she
expected to see Hargrave steal upon her; in every gust of the chill
November wind she thought she heard his footstep. She passed the last
cottages connected with Norwood. The evening fires glanced cheerfully
through the casements, and the voice of rustic merriment came softened
on the ear. 'Amiable De Courcy!' thought Laura. 'The meanest of his
dependents finds comfort in his protection, while the being on whom I
have lavished the affection which might have rejoiced that worthy heart,
makes himself an object of dread, even to her whom he pretends to love.'
She reached home, however, without interruption, and was going to join
Lady Pelham in the sitting-room; when happening to pass a looking-glass,
she observed that her eyes still bore traces of the tears she had been
shedding, and, in dread of the merciless raillery of her aunt, she
retired to her own room. There, with an undefined feeling of
despondence, she sat down to re-consider her conversation with De
Courcy.

Never was task more easy, or more unprofitable. She remembered every
word that De Courcy had uttered; remembered the very tone, look, and
gesture with which they were spoken. She recollected too all that she
had said in reply; but she could by no means unravel the confused
effects of the scene upon her own mind. She certainly pitied her lover
to a very painful degree. 'Poor De Courcy!' said she, accompanying the
half-whisper with a heavy sigh. But having, in the course of half an
hour's rumination, repeated this soliloquy about twenty times, she began
to recollect that De Courcy had borne his disappointment with
considerable philosophy, and appeared to derive no small comfort from
the prospect of an intercourse of mere friendship. This fortunate
recollection, however, not immediately relieving her, she endeavoured to
account for her depression by laying hold of a vague idea which was
floating in her mind, that she had not on this occasion acted as she
ought. Friendships between young persons of different sexes were
proverbial fomenters of the tender passion; and though she was herself
in perfect safety, was it right to expose to such hazard the peace of De
Courcy? Was it generous, was it even honourable to increase the
difficulties of his self-conquest, by admitting him to the intimacy of
friendship? It was true he had voluntarily sought the post of danger:
but then he was under the dominion of an influence which did not allow
him to weigh consequences; and was it not unpardonable in her, who was
in full possession of herself, to sanction, to aid his imprudence? Yet
how could she have rejected a friendship which did her so much honour?
the friendship of the man whom her father had so loved and respected! of
the man to whom her father had wished to see her connected by the
closest ties! the man to whom she owed obligations never to be repaid?
Alas! how had she acknowledged these obligations? By suffering the most
amiable of mankind to sport with his affections, while she had weakly
thrown away her own. But the mischief was not yet totally irremediable;
and dazzled by the romantic generosity of sacrificing her highest
earthly joy to the restoration of her benefactor's quiet, she snatched a
pen intending to retract her promise. An obsolete notion of decorum was
for once favourable to a lover, and Laura saw the impropriety of writing
to De Courcy. Besides, it occurred to her that she might withdraw into
Scotland, without formally announcing the reason of her retreat; and
thus leave herself at liberty to receive De Courcy as a friend whenever
discretion should warrant this indulgence. After her most magnanimous
resolves however, feeling her mind as confused and comfortless as
before, she determined to obtain the benefit of impartial counsel, and
changed the destination of the paper on which she had already written
'My dear friend,' from De Courcy to Mrs Douglas.

With all her native candour and singleness of heart did Laura detail her
case to the monitress of her youth. To reveal De Courcy's name was
contrary to her principles; but she described his situation, his mode of
life, and domestic habits. She enlarged upon his character, her
obligations to him, and the regret which, for his sake, she felt, that
particular circumstances rendered her incapable of such an attachment as
was necessary to conjugal happiness. She mentioned her compliance with
her lover's request of a continuance of their former intimacy; confessed
her doubts of the propriety of her concession; and entreated Mrs
Douglas's explicit opinion on the past, as well as her directions for
the future.

Her mind thus unburdened, she was less perplexed and uneasy; and the
next morning cheerfully commenced her journey, pleasing herself with the
prospect of being released from the harassing attendance of Hargrave. On
the evening of the second day the travellers reached Grosvenor Street;
and the unsuspecting Laura, with renewed sentiments of gratitude to her
aunt, revisited the dwelling which had received her when she could claim
no other shelter.

Her annuity having now become due, Laura, soon after her arrival in
town, one day borrowed Lady Pelham's chariot, that she might go to
receive the money, and purchase some necessary additions to her
wardrobe. Remembering, however, the inconveniencies to which she had
been subjected by her imprudence in leaving herself without money, she
regulated her disbursements by the strictest economy; determined to
reserve a sum, which, besides a little gift to her cousin, might defray
the expences of a journey to Scotland.

Her way chancing to lie through Holborn, a recollection of the
civilities of her old landlady, induced her to stop and inquire for Mrs
Dawkins. The good woman almost compelled her to alight; overwhelmed her
with welcomes, and asked a hundred questions in a breath, giving in
return a very detailed account of all her family affairs. She informed
Laura, that Miss Julia, having lately read the life of a heroine who in
the capacity of a governess captivated the heart of a great lord, had
been seized with the desire to seek adventures under a similar
character; but finding that recommendations for experience were
necessary to her admission into any family of rank, she had condescended
to serve her apprenticeship in the tuition of the daughters of an
eminent cowfeeder. The good woman expressed great compassion for the
pupils of so incompetent a teacher, from whom they could learn nothing
useful. 'But that was,' she observed, 'their father's look out, and in
the mean time, it was so far well that July was doing something towards
her keeping.' After a visit of some length Laura wished to be gone, but
her hostess would not suspend her eloquence long enough to suffer her to
take leave. She was at last obliged to interrupt the harangue; and
breaking from her indefatigable entertainer, hurried home, not a little
alarmed lest her stay should expose her on her return home to oratory
of a different kind. Lady Pelham, however, received her most graciously,
examined all her purchases, and enquired very particularly into the cost
of each. She calculated the amount, and the balance of the annuity
remaining in Laura's possession. 'Five and thirty pounds!' she
exclaimed--'what in the world, Laura, will you do with so much money?'
'Perhaps five and thirty different things,' answered Laura, smiling; 'I
have never had, nor ever shall have, half so much money as I could
spend.' 'Oh you extravagant thing!' cried Lady Pelham patting her cheek.
'But take care that some one does not save you the trouble of spending
it. You should be very sure of the locks of your drawers. You had better
let me put your treasures into my bureau.' Laura was about to comply,
when recollecting that there might be some awkwardness in asking her
aunt for the money while she concealed its intended destination, she
thanked Lady Pelham, but said she supposed it would be perfectly safe in
her own custody; and then, as usual, avoided impending altercation by
hastening out of the room. She thought Lady Pelham looked displeased;
but as that was a necessary effect of the slightest contradiction, she
saw it without violent concern; and the next time they met, her Ladyship
was again all smiles and courtesy.

Three days, 'three wondrous days', all was sunshine and serenity. Lady
Pelham was the most ingenious, the most amusing, the most fascinating of
woman-kind. 'What a pity,' thought Laura, 'that my aunt's spirits are so
fluctuating! How delightful she can be when she pleases!' In the midst
of these brilliant hours, Lady Pelham one morning ran into the room
where Laura was at work--'Here's a poor fellow,' said she, with a look
and voice all compassion, 'who has sent me his account, and says he must
go to jail if it is not paid instantly. But it is quite impossible for
me to get the money till tomorrow.' 'To jail!' cried Laura,
shocked--'What is the amount?' 'Forty pounds,' said Lady Pelham, 'and I
have not above ten in the house.' 'Take mine,' cried Laura, hastening to
bring it. Lady Pelham stopped her. 'No, my dear good girl,' said she, 'I
wont take away your little store, perhaps you may want it yourself.' 'Oh
no,' said Laura, 'I cannot want it, pray let me bring it.' 'The poor man
has a large family,' said Lady Pelham, 'but indeed I am very unwilling
to take--' Her Ladyship spared further regrets, for Laura was out of
hearing. She returned in a moment with the whole of her wealth, out of
which, Lady Pelham, after some further hesitation, was prevailed upon
to take thirty pounds; a robbery to which she averred that she would
never have consented, but for the wretched situation of an innocent
family, and her own certainty of repaying the debt in a day or two at
farthest. Several days, however, passed away, and Lady Pelham made no
mention of discharging her debt. Laura wondered a little that her aunt
should forget a promise so lately and so voluntarily given; but her
attention was entirely diverted from the subject by the following letter
from Mrs Douglas.

     'You see, my dear Laura, I lose no time in answering your
     letter, though, for the first time, I answer you with some
     perplexity. The weight which you have always kindly allowed to
     my opinion, makes me at all times give it with timidity; but
     that is not the only reason of my present hesitation. I confess
     that in spite of the apparent frankness and perspicuity with
     which you have written, I am not able exactly to comprehend
     you. You describe a man of respectable abilities, of amiable
     dispositions, of sound principles, and engaging manners. You
     profess that such qualities, aided by intimacy, have secured
     your cordial friendship, while obligations beyond return have
     enlivened this friendship by the warmest gratitude. But, just
     as I am about to conclude that all this has produced its
     natural effect, and to prepare my congratulations for a happy
     occasion, you kill my expectations with a dismal sentence,
     expressing your regrets for having been obliged to reject the
     addresses of this excellent person. Now this might have been
     intelligible enough, supposing you were pre-occupied by a
     stronger attachment. But so far from this, you declare yourself
     absolutely incapable of any exclusive affection, or of such a
     regard as is necessary to any degree of happiness in the
     conjugal state. I know not, my dear Laura, what ideas you may
     entertain of the fervency suitable to wedded love; but, had you
     been less peremptory, I should have thought it not unlikely to
     spring from a young woman's "most cordial esteem" and "warmest
     gratitude" towards a young man with "expressive black eyes,"
     and "the most benevolent smile in the world."

     'From the tenor of your letter, as well as from some
     expressions you have formerly dropped, I am led to conjecture
     that you think an extravagant passion necessary to the
     happiness of married life. You will smile at the expression;
     but if it offends you, change it for any other descriptive of a
     feeling beyond tender friendship, and you will find the
     substitute nearly synonymous with the original. Now this idea
     appears to me rather erroneous; and I cannot help thinking that
     calm, dispassionate affection, at least on the side of the
     lady, promises more permanent comfort.

     'All male writers on the subject of love, so far as my little
     knowledge extends, represent possession as the infallible cure
     of passion. A very unattractive picture, it must be confessed,
     of the love of that lordly sex! but they themselves being the
     painters, the deformity is a pledge of the resemblance, and I
     own my small experience furnishes no instance to contradict
     their testimony. Taking its truth then for granted, I need not
     inquire whether the passions of our own sex be equally
     fleeting. If they be, the enamoured pair soon find themselves
     at best in the same situation with those who marry from sober
     sentiments of regard; that is, obliged to seek happiness in the
     esteem, the confidence, the forbearance of each other. But if,
     in the female breast, the fervours of passion be less
     transient, I need not describe to you the sufferings of
     feminine sensibility under half-returned ardour, nor the stings
     of feminine pride under the unnatural and mortifying
     transference of the arts of courtship. I trust, my dear child,
     that should you even make a marriage of passion, your
     self-command will enable you to smother its last embers in your
     own bosom, while your prudence will improve the short advantage
     which is conferred by its empire in that of your husband, to
     lay the foundation of an affection more tender than friendship,
     more lasting than love.

     'Again, it is surely of the utmost consequence to the felicity
     of wedded life, that a just and temperate estimate be formed of
     the character of him to whose temper we must accommodate
     ourselves; whose caprices we must endure; whose failings we
     must pardon, whether the discord burst upon us in thunder, or
     steal on amid harmonies which render it imperceptible, perhaps
     half-pleasing. Small chance is there that passion should view
     with the calm extenuating eye of reason the faults which it
     suddenly detects in the god of its idolatry. The once fervent
     votary of the idol, finding it unworthy of his worship,
     neglects the useful purposes to which he might apply the gold
     which it contains.

     'I have other reasons for thinking that passion is at best
     unnecessary to conjugal happiness; but even if I should make
     you a proselyte to my opinion, the conviction would, in the
     present case, probably come too late. Such a man as you
     describe will probably be satisfied with the answer he has
     received. He will certainly never importune you, nor poorly
     attempt to extort from your pity what he could not win from
     your love. His attachment will soon subside into a friendly
     regard for you, or be diverted into another channel by virtues
     similar to those which first attracted him. I only wish, my
     dear Laura, that after this change takes place, the
     "circumstances" may remain in force which render you "for ever
     incapable of repaying him with a love like his own." If you are
     sure that these circumstances are decisive, I foresee no evil
     which can result from your cultivating a friendship so
     honourable and advantageous to you, as that of a man of letters
     and a Christian; whose conversation may improve your mind, and
     whose experience may supply that knowledge of the world which
     is rarely attainable by women in the more private walks of
     life.

     'To him I should suppose that no danger could arise from such
     an intercourse. We are all apt to over-rate the strength and
     durability of the attachments we excite. I believe the truth
     is, that in a vigorous, well-governed, and actively employed
     mind, love rarely becomes that resistless tyrant which vanity
     and romances represent him. His empire is divided by the love
     of fame or the desire of usefulness, the eagerness of research
     or the triumph of discovery. But even solitude, idleness, and
     imagination cannot long support his dominion without the
     assistance of hope; and I take it for granted from your tried
     honour and generosity, that your answer has been too explicit
     to leave your lover in any doubt that your sentence is final.

     'I own I could have wished, that the virtues of my ever dear
     Laura had found in the sacred characters of wife and mother a
     larger field than a state of celibacy can afford; but I have no
     fear that your happiness or respectability should ever depend
     upon outward circumstances. I have no doubt that moderate
     wishes and useful employments will diffuse cheerfulness in the
     loneliest dwelling, while piety will people it with guests from
     heaven.

     'Thus, my beloved child, I have given my opinion with all the
     freedom you can desire. I have written a volume rather than a
     letter. The passion for giving advice long survives that which
     is the subject of our correspondence; but to shew you that I
     can lay some restraint on an old woman's rage for admonition, I
     will not add another line except that which assures you that I
     am, with all a mother's love, and all a friend's esteem,

                   'Your affectionate
                                     'E. DOUGLAS.'

Laura read this letter often, and pondered it deeply. Though she could
not deny that it contained some truths, she was not satisfied with the
doctrine deduced from them. She remembered that Mrs Douglas was the most
affectionate of wives; and concluded that in one solitary instance her
judgment had been at variance with her practice; and that, having
herself made a marriage of love, she was not an adequate judge of the
disadvantages attending a more dispassionate connection. Some passages
too she could well have spared; but as these were prophetic rather than
monitory, they required little consideration; and after the second
reading, Laura generally omitted them in the perusal of her friend's
epistle. Upon the whole, however, it gave her pleasure. Her conscience
was relieved by obtaining the sanction of Mrs Douglas to her promised
intimacy with De Courcy, and already she looked forward to the time when
it should be renewed.

Since her arrival in town, her aunt, all kindness and complacency, had
scarcely named Hargrave; and, with the sanguine temper of youth, Laura
hoped that she had at last exhausted the perseverance of her
persecutors. This fruitful source of strife removed, she thought she
could without much difficulty submit to the casual fits of caprice to
which Lady Pelham was subject; and considering that her aunt, with all
her faults, was still her most natural protector, and her house her most
proper abode, she began to lay aside thoughts of removing immediately to
Scotland, and to look towards Walbourne as her permanent home.

In the meantime she promised herself that the approaching winter would
bring her both amusement and information. The capital, with all its
wonders, of which she had hitherto seen little, the endless diversity of
character which she expected its inhabitants to exhibit, the
conversation of the literary and the elegant, of wits, senators, and
statesmen, promised an inexhaustible fund of instruction and delight.
Nay, the patriotic heart of Laura beat high with the hope of meeting
some of those heroes who, undaunted by disaster, where all but honour is
lost maintain the honour of Britain, or who, with happier fortune, guide
the triumphant navies of our native land. She was yet to learn how
little of character appears through the varnish of fashionable manners,
and how little a hero or a statesman at a rout differs from a mere man
of fashion in the same situation.

Lady Pelham seemed inclined to furnish her with all the opportunities
of observation which she could desire, introducing her to every visitor
of distinction, and procuring for her the particular attention of two
ladies of high rank, who constantly invited her to share in the gaieties
of the season. But Laura, instructed in the value of time, and feeling
herself accountable for its employment, stopped far short of the
dissipation of her companions. She had long since established a
criterion by which to judge of the innocence of her pleasure, accounting
every amusement, from which she returned to her duties with an exhausted
frame, languid spirits, or distracted attention, to be at best
dangerous, and contrary to all rational ends of recreation. Of
entertainments which she had never before witnessed, curiosity generally
induced her for once to partake; but she found few that could stand her
test; and to those which failed in the trial, she returned as seldom as
possible.

One species alone, if it deserves to be classed with entertainments, she
was unwillingly obliged to except from her rule. From card-parties Laura
always returned fatigued both in mind and body; while present at them
she had scarcely any other wish than to escape; and she quitted them
unfit for any thing but rest. Lady Pelham, however, sometimes made it a
point that her niece should accompany her to these parties; and, though
she never asked Laura to play, was occasionally at pains to interest her
in the game, by calling her to her side, appealing to her against
ill-fortune, or exacting her congratulations in success. A few of these
parties excepted, Laura's time passed pleasantly. Though the calm of her
aunt's temper was now and then disturbed by short gusts of anger, it
returned as lightly as it fled; and the subject, fertile in endless
chiding, seemed almost forgotten.

A fortnight had passed in this sort of quiet, when one morning Lady
Pelham proposed to carry Laura to see the Marquis of --'s superb
collection of pictures. Laura, obliged by her aunt's attention to her
prevailing taste, eagerly accepted the proposal, and hastened to equip
herself for the excursion. Light of heart, she was returning to the
drawing-room to wait till the carriage drew up, when, on entering, the
first object she beheld was Colonel Hargrave, seated confidentially by
the side of Lady Pelham.

Laura, turning sick with vexation, shrunk back; and, bewailing the
departure of her short-lived quiet, returned, half angry, half
sorrowful, to her own room. She had little time, however, to indulge her
chagrin, for Lady Pelham almost immediately sent to her to let her know
that the carriage waited. Disconcerted, and almost out of humour, Laura
had tossed aside her bonnet, and was about to retract her consent to go,
when, recollecting that the plan had been proposed on her account,
without any apparent motive unless to oblige her, she thought her aunt
would have just reason to complain of such an ungracious rejection of
her civility.

'Besides, it is like a spoiled child,' thought she, 'to quarrel with any
amusement, because one disagreeable circumstance attends it;' and,
readjusting her bonnet, she joined Lady Pelham, not without a secret
hope that Hargrave might not be of the party. The hope deceived her. He
was ready to hand her into the carriage, and to take his seat by her
side.

Her sanguine expectations thus put to flight, the habitual complacency
of Laura's countenance suffered a sudden eclipse. She answered almost
peevishly to Hargrave's inquiries for her health; and so complete was
her vexation, that it was long ere she observed how much his manner
towards her was changed. He whispered no extravagancies in her ear;
offered her no officious attentions; and seized no opportunities of
addressing her, but such as were consistent with politeness and respect.
He divided his assiduities not unequally between her and Lady Pelham;
and even without any apparent reluctance, permitted a genteel young man,
to whom the ladies curtsied in passing, to share in his office of
escort, and almost to monopolize Laura's conversation. Having
accompanied the ladies home, he left them immediately, refusing Lady
Pelham's invitation to dinner; and Laura, no less pleased than surprised
at this unexpected turn, wished him good morning more graciously than
she had of late spoken to him.

The next day he dined in Grosvenor Street, and the same propriety of
manner continued. The following evening Laura again met with him in a
large party. He did not distinguish her particularly from any of her
fair competitors. Laura was delighted. She was convinced that he had at
last resolved to abandon his fruitless pursuit; but what had so suddenly
wrought this happy change, she could not divine.

He did not visit Lady Pelham daily, yet it so happened that Laura saw
him every day, and still he was consistent. Laura scarcely doubted, yet
durst scarcely trust her good fortune.

The violent passions of Hargrave, however, in some degree unfitted him
for a deceiver; and sometimes the fiery glance of impatience, of
admiration, or of jealousy, belied the serenity of his manner. Laura
did not fail to remark this; but she possessed the happy faculty of
explaining every ambiguity in human conduct, in a way favourable to the
actor,--a faculty which, though it sometimes exposed her to mistake and
vexation, was, upon the whole, at once a happiness and a virtue. She
concluded that Hargrave, determined to persecute her no further, was
striving to overcome his passion; that the appearances she had remarked
were only the struggles which he could not wholly suppress; and she felt
herself grateful to him for making the attempt,--the more grateful from
her idea of its difficulty.

With her natural singleness of heart, she one day mentioned to Lady
Pelham the change in Hargrave's behaviour. 'I suppose,' added she
smiling, 'that, finding he can make nothing more of me, he is resolved
to lay me under obligation by leaving me at peace, having first
contrived to make me sensible of its full value.' Lady Pelham was a
better dissembler than Colonel Hargrave; and scarcely did a change of
colour announce the deception, while, in a tone of assumed anger, she
answered by reproaching her niece with having at last accomplished her
purpose, and driven her lover to despair. Yet Lady Pelham was aware that
Hargrave had not a thought of relinquishing his pursuit. His new-found
self-command was merely intended to throw Laura off her guard, that Lady
Pelham might have an opportunity of executing a scheme which Lambert had
conceived, to entangle Laura beyond the possibility of escape.

Many an action, harmless in itself, is seen, by a discerning bystander,
to have in it 'nature that in time will venom breed, though no teeth for
the present.' It happened that Lambert, while at Walbourne, had once
seen Laura engaged in a party at chess; and her bent brow and flushed
cheek, her palpitating bosom, her trembling hand, her eagerness for
victory, above all, her pleasure in success, restrained but not
concealed, inspired him with an idea that play might be made subservient
to the designs of his friend; designs which he was the more disposed to
promote, because, for the present, they occupied Hargrave to the
exclusion of that folly of which Lambert had so well availed himself.

It was Lambert's proposal that he should himself engage Laura in play;
and having won from her, by means which he could always command, that he
should transfer the debt to Hargrave. The scheme was seconded by Lady
Pelham, and, in part, acquiesced in by Hargrave. But though he could
consent to degrade the woman whom he intended for his wife, he could
not endure that any other than himself should be the instrument of her
degradation; and, sickening at the shackles which the love of gaming had
imposed upon himself, he positively refused to accede to that part of
the plan, which proposed to make Laura's entanglement with him the
branch of a habit previously formed. Besides, the formation of a habit,
especially one so contrary to previous bias, was a work of time; and a
strategem of tedious execution did not suit the impatience of Hargrave's
temper. He consented, however, to adopt a more summary modification of
the same artifice. It was intended that Laura should at first be induced
to play for a stake too small to alarm her, yet sufficiently great to
make success desirable; that she should at first be allowed to win; that
the stake should be increased until she should lose a sum which it might
incommode her to part with; and then that the stale cheat of gamblers,
hope of retrieving her loss, should be pressed on her as a motive for
venturing nearer to destruction.

The chief obstacle to the execution of this honourable enterprise lay in
the first step, the difficulty of persuading Laura to play for any sum
which could be at all important to her. For obviating this, Lady Pelham
trusted to the diffidence, the extreme timidity, the abhorrence of
notoriety, which nature strengthened by education had made a leading
feature in the character of Laura. Her Ladyship determined that the
first essay should be made in a large company, in the presence of
persons of rank, of fame, of talent, of every qualification which could
augment the awe almost amounting to horror, with which Laura shrunk from
the gaze of numbers.

Partly from a craving for a confident, partly in hope of securing
assistance, Lady Pelham communicated her intention to the honourable Mrs
Clermont, a dashing widow of five-and-thirty. The piercing black eyes,
the loud voice, the free manner, and good-humoured assurance of this
lady, had inspired Laura with a kind of dread, which had not yielded to
the advances which the widow condescended to make. Lady Pelham judged it
most favourable to her righteous purpose, that the first attempt should
be made in the house of Mrs Clermont, rather than in her own; both
because that lady's higher circle of acquaintance could command a more
imposing assemblage of visitors; and because this arrangement would
leave her Ladyship more at liberty to watch the success of her scheme,
than she could be where she was necessarily occupied as mistress of the
ceremonies.

The appointed evening came, and Lady Pelham, though with the utmost
kindness of manner, insisted upon Laura's attendance. Laura would rather
have been excused; yet, not to interrupt a humour so harmonious, she
consented to go. Lady Pelham was all complacency. She condescended to
preside at her niece's toilette, and obliged her to complete her dress
by wearing for that evening a superb diamond aigrette, one of the
ornaments of her own earlier years. Laura strenuously resisted this
addition to her attire, accounting it wholly unsuitable to her
situation; but her aunt would take no denial, and the affair was not
worthy of a more serious refusal. This important concern adjusted, Lady
Pelham viewed her niece with triumphant admiration. She burst forth into
praises of her beauty, declaring, that she had never seen her look half
so lovely. Yet, with skilful malice, she contrived to awaken Laura's
natural bashfulness, by saying, as they were alighting at Mrs Clermont's
door, 'Now my dear don't mortify me to-night by any of your Scotch
_gaucheries_. Remember every eye will be turned upon you.' 'Heaven
forbid,' thought Laura, and timidly followed her aunt to a couch where
she took her seat.

For a while Lady Pelham's words seemed prophetic, and Laura could not
raise her eyes without meeting the gaze of admiration or of scrutiny;
but the rooms began to be crowded by the great and the gay, and Laura
was relieved from her vexatious distinction. Lady Pelham did not long
suffer her to enjoy her release, but rising, proposed that they should
walk. Though Laura felt in her own majestic stature a very unenviable
claim to notice, a claim rendered more conspicuous by the contrast
offered in the figure of her companion, she could not with politeness
refuse to accompany her aunt, and giving Lady Pelham her arm, they began
their round.

Laura, little acquainted with the ease which prevails in town parties,
could not help wondering at the nonchalance of Mrs Clermont, who,
leaving her guests to entertain themselves as they chose, was lounging
on a sofa playing piquet with Colonel Hargrave. 'Mrs Clermont at
piquet,' said Lady Pelham. 'Come Laura, piquet is the only civilized
kind of game you play. You shall take a lesson;' and she led her niece
forwards through a circle of misses, who, in hopes of catching the
attention of the handsome Colonel Hargrave, were tittering and talking
nonsense most laboriously. This action naturally drew the eyes of all
upon Laura, and Lady Pelham, who expected to find useful engines in her
timidity and embarrassment, did not fail to make her remark the notice
which she excited. From this notice Laura would have escaped, by
seating herself near Mrs Clermont; but Lady Pelham perceiving her
intention, placed herself there without ceremony, so as to occupy the
only remaining seats, leaving Laura standing alone, shrinking at the
consciousness of her conspicuous situation. No one was near her to whom
she could address herself, and her only resource was bending down to
overlook Mrs Clermont's game.

She had kept her station long enough to be fully sensible of its
awkwardness, when Mrs Clermont, suddenly starting up, exclaimed, 'Bless
me! I had quite forgotten that I promised to make a loo-table for the
Dutchess. Do, my dear Miss Montreville, take my hand for half an hour.'
'Excuse me, Madam,' said Laura, drawing back, 'I play so ill.' 'Nay,
Laura,' interrupted Lady Pelham, 'your teacher is concerned to maintain
your skill, and I insist on it that you play admirably.' 'Had not your
Ladyship better play?' 'Oh no, my dear; I join the loo-table.' 'Come,'
said Mrs Clermont, offering Laura the seat she had just quitted, 'I will
take no excuse; so sit down, and success attend you!' The seat presented
Laura with an inviting opportunity of turning her back upon her
inspectors, she was averse from refusing such a trifling request, and
rather willing to give Hargrave a proof that she was not insensible to
the late improvement in his behaviour. She therefore quietly took the
place assigned her, while the trio exchanged smiles of congratulation on
the facility with which she had fallen into the snare.

Something, however, yet remained to be arranged, and Lady Pelham and her
hostess still kept their stations by her side. While dividing the cards,
Laura recollected having observed that, in town, every game seemed
played for money; and she asked her antagonist what was to be the stake.
He of course referred that point to her own decision; but Laura, in
profound ignorance of the arcana of card-tables, blushed, hesitated, and
looked at Lady Pelham and Mrs Clermont for instructions. 'We don't play
high in this house, my dear,' said Mrs Clermont, 'Colonel Hargrave and I
were only playing guineas.' 'Laura is only a beginner,' said Lady
Pelham, 'and perhaps half a guinea'--Laura interrupted her aunt by
rising and deliberately collecting the cards, 'Colonel Hargrave will
excuse me,' said she. 'That is far too great a stake for me.' 'Don't be
absurd, my dear,' said Lady Pelham, touching Laura's sleeve, and
affecting to whisper; 'why should not you play as other people do?'
Laura not thinking this a proper time to explain her conscientious
scruples, merely answered, that she could not afford it; and, more
embarrassed than before, would have glided away, but neither of her
guards would permit her to pass. 'You need not mind what you stake with
Hargrave,' said Lady Pelham apart; 'you play so much better than he that
you will infallibly win.' 'That does not at all alter the case,'
returned Laura. 'It would be as unpleasant to me to win Colonel
Hargrave's money as to lose my own.' 'Whatever stake Miss Montreville
chooses must be equally agreeable to me,' said Colonel Hargrave; but
Laura observed that the smile which accompanied these words had in it
more of sarcasm than of complacency. 'I should be sorry, Sir,' said she,
'that you lowered your play on my account. Perhaps some of these young
ladies,' continued she, looking round to the talkative circle
behind--'Be quiet, Laura,' interrupted Lady Pelham, again in an under
tone; 'you will make yourself the town-talk with your fooleries.' 'I
hope not,' returned Laura, calmly; 'but if I do, there is no help;
little inconveniencies must be submitted to for the sake of doing
right.' 'Lord, Miss Montreville,' cried Mrs Clermont aloud, 'what odd
notions you have! Who would mind playing for half a guinea. It is
nothing; absolutely nothing. It would not buy a pocket handkerchief.' It
would buy a week's food for a poor family, thought Laura; and she was
confirmed in her resolution; but not willing to expose this reason to
ridicule, and a little displeased that Mrs Clermont should take the
liberty of urging her, she coolly, yet modestly replied, 'That such
matters must greatly depend on the opinions and circumstances of the
parties concerned, of which they were themselves the best judges.' 'I
insist on your playing,' said Lady Pelham, in an angry half-whisper. 'If
you will make yourself ridiculous, let it be when I am not by to share
in the ridicule.' 'Excuse me, Madam, for to-night,' returned Laura,
pleadingly. 'Before another evening I will give you reasons which I am
sure will satisfy you.' 'I am sure,' said Hargrave, darting a very
significant look towards Laura, 'if Miss Montreville, instead of cards,
prefers allowing me to attend her in your absence, I shall gain
infinitely by the exchange.' Laura, to whom his glance made this hint
very intelligible, reddened; and, saying she would by no means interrupt
his amusement, was again turning to seek a substitute among her
tittering neighbours, when Mrs Clermont prevented her, by calling out to
a lady at a considerable distance. 'My dear Dutchess, do have the
goodness to come hither, and talk to this whimsical beauty of ours. She
is seized with an economical fit, and has taken it into her pretty
little head that I am quite a gambler because I fix her stake at
half-a-guinea.' 'What may not youth and beauty do!' said her Grace,
looking at Laura with a smile half-sly half-insinuating. 'When I was the
Miss Montreville of my day, I too might have led the fashion of playing
for pence, though now I dare not venture even to countenance it.' The
mere circumstance of rank could never discompose Laura; and, rather
taking encouragement from the charming though faded countenance of the
speaker, she replied, 'But, in consideration of having no pretensions to
lead the fashion, may I not claim exemption from following it?' 'Oh, by
no means,' said her Grace. 'When once you have entered the world of
fashion, you must either be the daring leader or the humble follower. If
you choose the first, you must defy the opinions of all other people;
and, if the last, you must have a suitable indifference for your own.'
'A gentle intimation,' returned Laura, 'that in the world of fashion I
am quite out of place, since nothing but my own opinion is more awful to
me than that of others.' 'Miss Montreville,' said Lady Pelham, with an
aspect of vinegar, 'we all await your pleasure.' 'Pray, Madam,' answered
Laura, 'do not let me detain you a moment; I shall easily dispose of
myself.' 'Take up your cards this instant, and let us have no more of
these airs,' said Lady Pelham, now without affectation whispering, in
order to conceal from her elegant companions the wrath which was,
however, distinctly written in her countenance.

It now occurred to Laura as strange, that so much trouble should be
taken to prevail upon her to play for more than she inclined. Hargrave,
though he had pretended to release her, still kept his seat, and his
language had tended rather to embarrass than relieve her. Mrs Clermont
had interfered further than Laura thought either necessary or proper;
and Lady Pelham was eager to carry her point. Laura saw that there was
something in all this which she did not comprehend; and, looking up to
seek an explanation in the faces of her companions, she perceived that
the whole trio seemed waiting her decision with looks of various
interest. The piercing black eyes of Mrs Clermont were fixed upon her
with an expression of sly curiosity. Hargrave hastily withdrew a
sidelong glance of anxious expectation; while Lady Pelham's face was
flushed with angry impatience of delay. 'Has your Ladyship any
particular reason for wishing that I should play for a higher stake than
I think right?' said Laura, fixing on her aunt a look of calm scrutiny.
Too much out of humour to be completely on her guard, Lady Pelham's
colour deepened several shades, while she answered, 'I child! what
should make you think so?' 'I don't know,' said Laura. 'People sometimes
try to _convince_ from mere love of victory; but they seldom take the
trouble to _persuade_ without some other motive.' 'Any friend,' said
Lady Pelham, recollecting herself, 'would find motive enough for what I
have done, in the absurd appearance of these littlenesses to the world,
and the odium that deservedly falls on a young miser.' 'Nay, Lady
Pelham,' said the Dutchess, 'this is far too severe. Come,' added she,
beckoning to Laura, with a gracious smile, 'you shall sit by me, that I
may endeavour to enlarge your conceptions on the subject of
card-playing.'

Laura, thus encouraged, instantly begged her aunt's permission to pass.
Lady Pelham could not decently refuse; and, venting her rage, by
pinching Laura's arm till the blood came, and muttering through her
clenched teeth, 'obstinate wretch,' she suffered her niece to escape.
Laura did not condescend to bestow any notice upon this assault, but,
pulling her glove over her wounded arm, took refuge beside the Dutchess.
The fascinating manners of a high-bred woman of fashion, and the
respectful attentions offered to her whom the Dutchess distinguished by
her particular countenance, made the rest of the evening pass agreeably,
in spite of the evident ill-humour of Lady Pelham. Her ladyship
restrained the further expression of her rage till Laura and she were on
their way home; when it burst out in reproaches of the parsimony,
obstinacy, and perverseness which had appeared in her niece's refusal to
play. Laura listened to her in silence; sensible, that while Lady
Pelham's passion overpowered the voice of her own reason, it was vain to
expect that she should hear reason from another. But, next day, when she
judged that her aunt had had time to grow cool, she took occasion to
resume the subject; and explained, with such firmness and precision, her
principles in regard to the uses of money and the accountableness of its
possessors, that Lady Pelham laid aside thoughts of entangling her by
means of play; since it was vain to expect that she would commit to the
power of chance that which she habitually considered as the sacred
deposit of a father, and specially destined for the support and comfort
of his children.




CHAPTER XXIX


Hargrave no sooner perceived the futility of his design to involve Laura
in a debt of honour, than he laid aside the disguise which had been
assumed to lull her vigilance, and which he had never worn without
difficulty. He condescended, however, to save appearance, by taking
advantage of the idea which Laura had herself suggested to Lady Pelham,
and averred that he had made a powerful effort to recover his
self-possession; but he declared that, having totally failed in his
endeavours to obtain his liberty, he was determined never to renew them,
and would trust to time and accident for removing Laura's prejudice. In
vain did she assure him that no time could produce such a revolution in
her sentiments as would at all avail him; that though his eminent
improvement in worth might secure her esteem, her affections were
alienated beyond recall. The old system was resumed, and with greater
vigour than before, because with less fear of observation and more
frequent opportunities of attack. Every meal, every visit, every public
place, furnished occasions for his indefatigable assiduities, from which
Laura found no refuge beyond the precincts of her own chamber.

Regardless of the vexation which such a report might give her, he chose
to make his suit a subject of the tittle-tattle of the day. By this
manoeuvre, in which he had before found his advantage, he hoped that
several purposes might be served. The publicity of his claim would keep
other pretenders at a distance; it would oblige those who mentioned him
to Laura to speak, if not favourably, at least with decent caution; and
it might possibly at last induce her to listen with less reluctance to
what every one spoke of as natural and probable. Lady Pelham seconded
his intentions, by hints of her niece's engagement, and confidential
complaints to her friends of the _mauvaise honte_ which made Laura
treat with such reserve the man to whom she had long been affianced. The
consequence of their manoeuvring was, that Hargrave's right to persecute
Laura seemed universally acknowledged. The men, at his approach, left
her free to his attendance; the women entertained her with praises of
his person, manners, and equipage; with hints of her situation, too
gentle to warrant direct contradiction; or charges made with conviction
too strong to yield any form of denial.

Lady Pelham, too, resumed her unwearied remonstrances, and teased,
chided, argued, upbraided, entreated, and scolded, through every tedious
hour in which the absence of visitors left Laura at her mercy. Laura had
at one time determined against submitting to such treatment, and had
resolved, that, if it were renewed, she would seek a refuge far from her
persecutors, and from England. But that resolution had been formed when
there appeared no immediate necessity for putting it in practice; and
England contained somewhat to which Laura clung almost unconsciously.
Amidst all her vexations, Mrs De Courcy's letters soothed her ruffled
spirits; and more than once, when she renewed her determination to quit
Lady Pelham, a few lines from Norwood made her pause in its fulfilment,
reminding her that a few months, however unpleasing, would soon steal
away, and that her return to the country would at least bring some
mitigation of her persecutions.

Though Mrs De Courcy wrote often, and confidentially, she never
mentioned Montague further than was necessary to avoid particularity.
She said little of his health, nothing of his spirits or occupations,
and never hinted any knowledge of his rejected love. Laura's inquiries
concerning him were answered with vague politeness; and thus her
interest in the state of his mind was constantly kept awake. Often did
she repeat to herself, that she hoped he would soon learn to consider
her merely as a friend; and that which we have often repeated as truth,
we in time believe to be true.

Laura had been in town about a month, when one of her letters to Norwood
was followed by a longer silence than usual. She wrote again, and still
the answer was delayed. Fearing that illness prevented Mrs De Courcy
from writing, Laura had endured some days of serious anxiety, when a
letter was brought her, addressed in Montague's hand. She hastily tore
it open, and her heart fluttered between pleasure and apprehension, when
she perceived that the whole letter was written by him. It was short and
cautious. He apologized for the liberty he took, by saying, that a
rheumatic affection having prevented his mother from using her pen, she
had employed him as her secretary, fearing to alarm Laura by longer
silence. The letter throughout was that of a kind yet respectful friend.
Not a word betrayed the lover. The expressions of tender interest and
remembrance with which it abounded, were ascribed to Mrs De Courcy, or
at least shared with her, in a manner which prevented any embarrassment
in the reply. Laura hesitated for a moment, whether her answer should be
addressed to Mrs De Courcy, or to Montague; but Montague was her
benefactor, their intimacy was sanctioned by her best friend, and it is
not difficult to imagine how the question was decided. Her answer
produced a reply, which again was replied to in its turn; and thus a
correspondence was established, which, though at first constrained and
formal, was taught by Montague's prudent forbearance, to assume a
character of friendly ease.

This correspondence, which soon formed one of Laura's chief pleasures,
she never affected to conceal from Lady Pelham. On the contrary, she
spoke of it with perfect openness and candour. Unfortunately, however,
it did not meet with her Ladyship's approbation. She judged it highly
unfavourable to her designs in regard to Hargrave. She imagined that, if
not already an affair of love, it was likely soon to become so; and she
believed that, at all events, Laura's intercourse with the De Courcys
would foster those antiquated notions of morality to which Hargrave owed
his ill success. Accordingly, she at first objected to Laura's new
correspondence; then lectured on its impropriety and imprudence; and,
lastly took upon her peremptorily to prohibit its continuance. Those who
are already irritated by oppression, a trifle will at last rouse to
resistance. This was an exercise of authority so far beyond Laura's
expectations, that it awakened her resolution to submit no longer to the
importunity and persecution which she had so long endured, but to depart
immediately for Scotland. Willing, however, to execute her purpose with
as little expence of peace as possible, she did not open her intentions
at the moment of irritation. She waited a day of serenity to propose her
departure.

In order to procure the means of defraying the expence of her journey,
it was become necessary to remind Lady Pelham of her loan, which
appeared to have escaped her Ladyship's recollection. Laura,
accordingly, one day gently hinted a wish to be repaid. Lady Pelham at
first looked surprised, and affected to have forgotten the whole
transaction; but, upon being very distinctly reminded of the
particulars, she owned that she recollected something of it, and
carelessly promised to settle it soon; adding that she knew Laura had no
use for the money. Laura then frankly announced the purpose to which she
meant to apply it; saying, that, as her aunt was now surrounded by more
agreeable society, she hoped she might, without inconvenience, be
spared, and would therefore relieve Lady Pelham of her charge, by paying
a visit to Mrs Douglas. Rage flamed in Lady Pelham's countenance, while
she burst into a torrent of invective against her niece's ingratitude,
and coldness of heart; and it mingled with triumph as she concluded by
saying,--'Do, Miss; by all means go to your precious Scotland, but find
the means as you best can; for not one penny will I give you for such a
purpose. I have long expected some such fine freak as this, but I
thought I should disappoint it.' Not daunted by this inauspicious
beginning, Laura, taking encouragement from her aunt's known
instability, again and again renewed the subject; but Lady Pelham's
purposes, however easily shaken by accident or caprice, were ever
inflexible to entreaty. 'She possessed,' she said, 'the means of
preventing her niece's folly, and she was determined to employ them.'
Laura burnt with resentment at the injustice of this determination. She
acknowledged no right which Lady Pelham possessed to detain her against
her own consent, and she considered the detention of her lawful property
as little else than fraud. But perceiving that remonstrance was useless,
she judged it most prudent not to embitter, by vain recriminations, an
intercourse from which she could not immediately escape. Without further
complaint or upbraiding, she submitted to her fate; content with
resolving to employ more discreetly the next payment of her annuity, and
with making a just but unavailing appeal to her aunt's generosity, by
asserting the right of defencelessness to protection. Lady Pelham had
not the slightest idea of conceding any thing to this claim. On the
contrary, the certainty that Laura could not withdraw from her power,
encouraged her to use it with less restraint. She invited Hargrave to a
degree of familiarity which he had not before assumed; admitted him at
all hours; sanctioned any freedom which he dared to use with Laura; and
forced or inveigled her into frequent tête-à-têtes with him.

Fretted beyond her patience, Laura's temper more than once failed under
this treatment, and she bitterly reproached Hargrave as the source of
all her vexation. As it was, however, her habitual study to convert
every event of her life to the purposes of virtue, it soon occurred to
her, that, during these compulsory interviews, she might become the
instrument of awakening her unworthy lover to more noble pursuits. Like
a ray of light, the hope of usefulness darted into her soul, shedding a
cheering beam on objects which before were dark and comfortless; and,
with all the enthusiastic warmth of her character, she entered on her
voluntary task; forgetting, in her eagerness to recal a sinner from the
error of his ways, the weariness, disgust, and dread with which she
listened to the ravings of selfish passion. She no longer endeavoured to
avoid him, no longer listened to him with frozen silence or avowed
disdain. During their interviews, she scarcely noticed his
protestations, but employed every interval in urging him, with all the
eloquence of dread, to retreat from the gulf which was yawning to
receive him; in assuring him, with all the solemnity of truth, that the
waters of life would repay him a thousand-fold for the poisoned cup of
pleasure. Truth, spoken by the loveliest lips in the world, confirmed by
the lightnings of a witching eye, kindled at times in Hargrave a
something which he mistook for the love of virtue. He declared his
abhorrence of his former self, asserted the innocence of his present
manner of life, and vowed that, for the future, he should be blameless.
But when Laura rather incautiously urged him to give proof of his
reformation, by renouncing a passion whose least gratifications were
purchased at the expence of justice and humanity, he insisted that she
required more than nature could endure, and vehemently protested that he
would never, but with life, relinquish the hope of possessing her. Her
remonstrances had however one effect, of which she was altogether
unconscious. Hargrave could not estimate the force of those motives
which led her to labour so earnestly for the conversion of a person
wholly indifferent to her; and though she often assured him that her
zeal was disinterested, he cherished a hope that she meant to reward his
improvement. In this hope he relinquished, for a while, the schemes
which he had devised against the unsuspecting Laura, till accident again
decided him against trusting to her free consent for the accomplishment
of his wishes.

Among other exercises of authority to which Lady Pelham was emboldened
by her niece's temporary dependence on her will, she adhered to her
former prohibition of Laura's correspondence with De Courcy. Laura,
unwilling to make it appear a matter of importance, promised that she
would desist; but said that she must first write to Mr De Courcy to
account for her seeming caprice. Lady Pelham consented, and the letter
was written. It spoke of Laura's situation, of her sentiments, of her
regret for Hargrave's strange perseverance, of the dread and vexation to
which he occasionally subjected her. To atone for its being the last, it
was more friendly, more communicative than any she had formerly written.
Laura meant to disguise under a sportive style the effects which
oppression had produced upon her spirits; and the playful melancholy
which ran throughout, gave her expressions an air of artless tenderness.
Lady Pelham passed through the hall as this letter was lying upon the
table, waiting for the servant who was to carry it to the post; she
looked at it. The sheet was completely filled. She wondered what it
could contain. She took it up and examined it, as far as the seal would
permit her. What she saw did but increase her curiosity. It was only
wafered, and therefore easily opened; but then it was so dishonourable
to open a letter. Yet what could the letter be the worse? A girl should
have no secrets from her near relations. Still, to break a seal!--It was
felony by the law. Lady Pelham laid down the letter and walked away,
already proud of having disdained to do a base action; but she heard the
servant coming for his charge; she thought it best to have time to
consider the matter. She could give him the letter at any time--and she
slipped it into her pocket.

Sad sentence is produced against 'the woman who deliberates:' Lady
Pelham read the letter; and then, in the heat of her resentment at the
manner in which her favourite was mentioned, shewed it to Hargrave. As
he marked the innocent confiding frankness, the unconstrained respect,
the chastened yet avowed regard, with which Laura addressed his rival,
and contrasted them with the timid caution which, even during the reign
of passion, had characterized her intercourse with himself,--contrasted
them too with the mixture of pity, dislike, and dread, which had
succeeded her infatuation, all the pangs of rage and jealousy took hold
on the soul of Hargrave. He would have vented his frenzy by tearing the
letter to atoms, but Lady Pelham snatched it from his quivering grasp,
and dreading detection, sealed and restored it to its first destination.

The first use which he made of his returning powers of self-command, was
to urge Lady Pelham's concurrence in a scheme which he had before
devised, but which had been laid aside in consequence of his ill-founded
hopes. He entreated that her Ladyship would, by an opportune absence,
assist his intention; which was, he said, to alarm Laura with the
horrors of a pretended arrest for an imaginary debt, and to work upon
the gratefulness of her disposition, by himself appearing as her
deliverer from her supposed difficulty. Lady Pelham in vain urged the
futility of this strategem, representing the obstacles to its
accomplishment, and the certainty of early detection. Hargrave continued
to importune, and she yielded.

Yet Hargrave himself was as far as Lady Pelham from expecting any fruits
from the feeble artifice which he had detailed to her. He had little
expectation that Laura could ever be induced to receive any pecuniary
obligation at his hands, and still less that she would consider a loan
which she might almost immediately repay, as a favour important enough
to be rewarded with herself. He even determined that his aid should be
offered in terms which would ensure its rejection. Though he durst not
venture to unfold his whole plan to Lady Pelham, his real intention was
merely to employ the disguise of the law in removing Laura from even the
imperfect protection of her aunt, to a place where she would be utterly
without defence from his power. To the baseness of his purpose he
blinded himself by considering the reparation which he should make in
bestowing wealth and title on his victim; its more than savage brutality
he forgot in anticipation of the gratitude with which Laura, humbled in
her own eyes, and in those of the world, would accept the assiduities
which now she spurned. He little knew the being whom he thus devoted to
destruction! Incited by jealousy and resentment, he now resolved on the
immediate execution of his design; and he did not quit Lady Pelham till
he had obtained her acquiescence in it so far as it was divulged to her.
He then hastened to prepare the instruments of his villainy; and ere he
gave himself time to cool, all was in readiness for the scheme which was
to break the innocent heart that had loved and trusted him in seeming
virtue, and pitied and prayed for him and warned him in guilt. How had
the shades of evil deepened since the time when Hargrave first faltered
between his infant passion and a virtuous purpose! He had turned from
the path which 'shineth more and more unto the perfect day.' On that in
which he trode the night was stealing, slow but sure, which closes at
last in outer darkness.

One morning at breakfast, Lady Pelham, with more than usual civility,
apologized for leaving Laura alone during the rest of the day, saying
that business called her but a few miles out of the town, but that she
would return in the evening. She did not say whither she was going; and
Laura, never imagining that it could at all concern her to know, did not
think of inquiring. Pleasing herself with the prospect of one day of
peace and solitude, she saw her aunt depart, and then sat down to detail
to the friend of her youth her situation, her wishes, and her
intentions. She was interrupted by a servant who came to inform her that
two men below desired to speak with her. Wondering who in that land of
strangers could have business with her, Laura desired that they should
be shewn up stairs. Two coarse robust-looking men, apparently of the
lower rank, entered the room. Laura was unable to divine what could have
procured her a visit from persons of their appearance; yet, with her
native courtesy, she was motioning them to a seat, when one of them
stepped forward; and, laying on her shoulder a stick which he held,
said, in a rough ferocious voice, 'Laura Montreville, I arrest you at
the suit of John Dykes.' Laura was surprised but not alarmed. 'This must
be some mistake,' said she, 'I know no such person as John Dykes.' 'He
knows you though, and that is enough,' answered the man. 'Friend,'
returned Laura, mildly, 'you mistake me for some other person.' 'What,
Miss,' said the other man, advancing, 'do you pretend that you are not
Laura Montreville, daughter of the late Captain William Montreville, of
Glenalbert in Scotland?' Laura, now changing colour, owned that she was
the person so described. 'But,' said she, recovering herself, 'I cannot
be arrested. I do not owe five shillings in the world.' 'Mayhap not,
Miss,' said the man, 'but your father did; and you can be proved to have
intermeddled with his effects as his heiress, which makes you liable for
all his debts. So you'll please pay me the two hundred pounds which he
owed to Mr John Dykes.' 'Two hundred pounds!' exclaimed Laura. 'The
thing is impossible. My father left a list of his debts in his own
hand-writing, and they have all been faithfully discharged by the sale
of his property in Scotland.' The men looked at each other for a moment,
and seemed to hesitate; but the roughest of the two presently answered,
'What nonsense do you tell me of lists? who's to believe all that? I
have a just warrant; so either pay the money or come along.' 'Surely,
friend,' said Laura, who now suspected the people to be mere swindlers,
'you cannot expect that I should pay such a sum without inquiring into
your right to demand it. If your claim be a just one, present it in a
regular account, properly attested, and it shall be paid to-morrow.' 'I
have nothing to do with to-morrow, Miss,' said the man. 'I must do my
business. It's all one to me whether you pay or not. It does not put a
penny in my pocket: only if you do not choose to pay, come along; for we
can't be standing here all day.' 'I cannot procure the money just now,
even though I were willing,' answered Laura, with spirit, 'and I do not
believe you have any right to remove me.' 'Oh, as for the right, Miss,
we'll let you see that. There is our warrant, properly signed and
sealed. You may look at it in my hand, for I don't much like to trust
you with it.'

The warrant was stamped, and imposingly written upon parchment. With the
tautology which Laura had been taught to expect in a law-paper, it rung
changes upon the permission to seize and confine the person of Laura
Montreville, as heiress of William Montreville, debtor to John Dykes of
Pimlico. It was signed as by a magistrate, and marked with the large
seals of office. Laura now no longer doubted; and, turning pale and
faint, asked the men whether they would not stay for an hour while she
sent to Finsbury Square to beg the advice of Mr Derwent, Lady Pelham's
man of business. 'You may send for him to the lock-up house,' said the
savage. 'We have no time to spare.' 'And whither will you take me?'
cried Laura, almost sinking with horror. 'Most likely,' answered the
most gentle of the two ruffians, 'you would not like to be put into the
common prison; and you may have as good accommodations in my house as
might serve a dutchess.'

Spite of her dismay Laura's presence of mind did not entirely forsake
her. She hesitated whether she should not send to beg the assistance of
some of Lady Pelham's acquaintance, or at least their advice in a
situation so new to her. Among them all there was none with whom she had
formed any intimacy; none whom, in her present circumstances of
embarrassment and humiliation, she felt herself inclined to meet. She
shrunk at the thought of the form in which her story might be
represented by the malignant or the misjudging, and she conceived it her
best course to submit quietly to an inconvenience of a few hours
continuance, from which she did not doubt that her aunt's return would
that evening relieve her. Still the idea of being a prisoner; of
committing herself to such attendants; of being an inmate of the abodes
of misery, of degradation, perhaps of vice, filled her with dread and
horror, while, sinking on a couch, she covered her pale face with her
hands, and inwardly commended herself to the care of heaven.

The men, meanwhile, stood whispering apart, and seemed to have forgotten
the haste which they formerly expressed. At last one of them, after
looking from the window into the street, suddenly approached her, and,
rudely seizing her arm, cried, 'Come, Miss, the coach can't wait all
day. It's of no use crying; we're too well used to that, so walk away if
you don't choose to be carried.' Laura dashed the tears from her eyes,
and, faintly trying to disengage her arm, was silently following her
conductor to the door, when it opened and Hargrave entered.

Prepared as he was for a scene of distress, determined as he was to let
no movement of compassion divert his purpose, he could not resist the
quiet anguish which was written in the lovely face of his victim; and
turning with real indignation to her tormentor, he exclaimed, 'Ruffian!
what have you done to her?' But quickly recollecting himself, he threw
his arm familiarly round her, and said, 'My dearest Laura, what is the
meaning of all this? What can these people want with you?' 'Nothing
which can at all concern you Sir,' said Laura, her spirit returning at
the boldness of his address. 'Nay, my dear creature,' said Hargrave, 'I
am sure something terrible has happened. Speak, fellows,' said he,
turning to his emissaries, 'what is your business with Miss
Montreville?' 'No great matter, Sir,' answered the man; 'only we have a
writ against her for two hundred pounds, and she does not choose to pay
it; so we must take her to a little snug place, that's all.' 'To a
prison! You, Laura, to a prison! Heavens! it is not to be thought of.
Leave the room fellows, and let me talk with Miss Montreville.' 'There
is no occasion, Sir,' said Laura. 'I am willing to submit to a short
confinement. My aunt returns this evening, and she will undoubtedly
advance the money. It ought to be much the same to me what room I
inhabit for the few intervening hours.' 'Good heaven! Laura do you
consider what you say? Do you consider the horrors--the disgrace?
Dearest girl, suffer me to settle this affair, and let me for once do
something that may give you pleasure.' Laura's spirit revolted from the
freedom with which this was spoken. Suffering undeserved humiliation,
never had she been more jealous of her claim to respect. 'I am obliged
to you, Sir,' said she, 'but your good offices are unnecessary. Some
little hardship, I find, I must submit to; and I believe the smallest
within my choice is to let these people dispose of me till Lady Pelham's
return.' Hargrave reddened. 'She prefers a prison,' thought he, 'to
owing even the smallest obligation to me. But her pride is near a fall;'
and he smiled with triumphant pity on the stately mien of his victim.

He was, in effect, almost indifferent whether she accepted or rejected
his proffered assistance. If she accepted it, he was determined that it
should be clogged with a condition expressly stated, that he was for the
future to be received with greater favour. If she refused, and he
scarcely doubted that she would, he had only to make the signal, and she
would be hurried, unresisting, to destruction. Yet, recollecting the
despair, the distraction, with which she would too late discover her
misfortune; the bitter upbraidings with which she would meet her
betrayer; the frantic anguish with which she would mourn her disgrace,
if, indeed, she survived it, he was inclined to wish that she would
choose the more quiet way of forwarding his designs, and he again
earnestly entreated her to permit his interference. Laura's strong
dislike to being indebted for any favour to Hargrave, was somewhat
balanced in her mind by the horror of a prison, and by the consideration
that she could immediately repay him by the sale of part of her annuity.
Though she still resisted his offer, therefore, it was less firmly than
before. Hargrave continued to urge her. 'If,' said he, 'you dislike to
allow me the pleasure of obliging you, this trifling sum may be restored
whenever you please; and if you afterwards think that any little debt
remains, it is in your power to repay it a thousand fold. One kind
smile, one consenting look, were cheaply purchased with a world.' The
hint which concluded this speech seemed to Laura manifestly intended to
prevent her acceptance of the offer which he urged so warmly. 'Are you
not ashamed, Sir,' said she, with a disdainful smile, 'thus to make a
parade of generosity which you do not mean to practise? I know you do
not--cannot expect, that I should poorly stoop to purchase your
assistance.' 'Upon my soul, Laura,' cried Hargrave, seizing her hands,
'I am most earnest, most anxious, that you should yield to me in this
affair; nor will I quit this spot till you have consented--nor till you
have allowed me to look upon your consent as a pledge of your future
favour.' Laura indignantly snatched her hands from his grasp. 'All that
I comprehend of this,' said she, 'is insult, only insult. Leave me, Sir!
It is unworthy even of you to insult the misfortunes of a defenceless
woman.' Hargrave would not be repulsed. He again took her hand and
persevered in his entreaties, not forgetting, however, to insinuate the
conditions. Laura, in silent scorn, turned from him, wondering what
could be the motive of his strange conduct, till it suddenly occurred to
her that the arrest might be a mere plot contrived by Hargrave himself
for the purpose of terrifying her into the acceptance of the conditions
necessary to her escape. This suspicion once formed gained strength by
every circumstance. The improbability of the debt; the time chosen when
Lady Pelham was absent; the opportune arrival of Hargrave; the
submission of the pretended bailiffs to his order; his frequent
repetition of the conditions of his offer, at the same time that he
appeared to wish for its acceptance; all conspired to convince Laura
that she was intended to be made the dupe of a despicable artifice.
Glowing with indignation, she again forced herself from Hargrave. 'Away
with this contemptible mockery,' she cried, 'I will hear no more of it.
While these people choose to guard me in this house, it shall be in an
apartment secure from your intrusion.' Then, before Hargrave could
prevent her, she left him, and shut herself into her own chamber.

Here, at greater liberty to think, a new question occurred to her. In
case of her refusal to accept of Hargrave's terms--in case she actually
preferred intrusting herself to the pretended bailiffs, whither could
they intend to convey her? Laura's blood ran cold at the thought. If
they were indeed the agents of Hargrave, what was there of dreadful that
she had not to fear! Yet she could scarcely believe that persons could
be found to attempt so daring a villany. Would they venture upon an
outrage for which they must answer to the laws! an outrage which Lady
Pelham would certainly feel herself concerned to bring to immediate
detection and punishment. 'Unfortunate chance!' cried Laura, 'that my
aunt should be absent just when she might have saved me. And I know not
even where to seek her.--Why did she not tell me whither she was going?
She who was wont to be so open!--Can this be a part of this cruel snare?
Could she--Oh it is impossible! My fears make me suspicious and unjust.'

Though Laura thus endeavoured to acquit Lady Pelham, her suspicion of
Hargrave's treachery augmented every moment. While she remembered that
her father, though he had spoken to her of his affairs with the most
confidential frankness, had never hinted at such a debt, never named
such a person as his pretended creditor--while she thought of the manner
of Hargrave's interference, the improbability that her own and her
father's name and address, as well as the casualty of Lady Pelham's
absence should be known to mere strangers--the little likelihood that
common swindlers would endeavour to extort money by means so hazardous
and with such small chance of success--her conviction rose to certainty;
and she determined that nothing short of force should place her in the
power of these impostors. Yet how soon might that force be employed!
How feeble was the resistance which she could offer! And who would
venture to aid her in resisting the pretended servants of law!
'Miserable creature that I am!' cried she, wringing her hands in an
agony of grief and terror, 'must I submit to this cruel wrong?--Is there
no one to save me--no friend near?--Yes! yes, I have a friend from whom
no treachery of man can tear me--who can deliver me from their
violence--who can do more--can make their cruelty my passport to life
eternal. Let me not despair then--Let me not be wanting to myself.--With
His blessing the feeblest means are mighty.'

After a moment's consideration Laura rung her bell, and the maid who
usually attended her appeared. 'Catherine,' said Laura, endeavouring to
speak composedly, 'will you oblige me by going to Finsbury Square, to Mr
Derwent, and begging of him to come hither instantly?' 'Bless me,
Madam,' cried the girl, 'you look as if you were just going to faint!
can I get you any thing?' 'No, no, I shall not faint,' said Laura. 'Go
my dear--go quickly--if you would save a wretch from destruction. Stop
not a moment I implore you!--Oh Catherine, more than life depends on
you!' The girl's curiosity was strongly excited by these words, as well
as by the strange visit of the men who were waiting in the lobby. She
would fain have staid to make inquiries, but the imploring anguish of
Laura's look and manner was irresistible, and she hastened out of the
room. Laura then double-locking the door determined that by force only
it should be entered, and throwing herself on a seat, strove to rally
the spirits she was so soon to need. In a few minutes, however,
Catherine returned, and through the key hole informed Laura that she had
been intercepted by the men below stairs, who would not suffer any one
to leave the house. 'All is then as I feared,' cried Laura in a voice of
desperation. 'And thus has he made his cruel plot so sure! Is there no
escape! Oh Catherine! cannot you steal away from them? Is there no means
to save me?' Moved by the voice of anguish, the girl promised to do her
utmost, but confessed that she had little hope of succeeding.

For a moment Laura believed her fate sealed, and almost gave herself up
to despair; but, now convinced of the treachery of Hargrave, and
unwillingly obliged to suspect Lady Pelham's connivance, indignation at
such unexampled baseness and cruelty again roused her fainting spirit.
Again she determined to resist to the uttermost, and if dragged by force
from her place of refuge, to appeal to the humanity of the passengers
in the street. 'Surely,' thought she, 'even common strangers will not
permit such oppression.' The windows of her chamber looked towards the
gardens behind the house; and she now regretted that she had not rather
shut herself up in one of the front apartments, from whence she could
have explained her situation to the passers by. Seeing no other chance
of escape, she resolved on attempting to change her place of refuge, and
was approaching the door to listen whether any one was near, when she
was startled by the rough voice of one of the pretended bailiffs. 'Come
along Miss,' he cried, 'we are quite tired of waiting. Come along.' The
shuddering Laura made no reply. 'Come, come Miss,' cried the man again;
'you have had time enough to make ready.' Laura continued silent, while
the ruffian called to her again and again, shaking the door violently.
He threatened, with shocking oaths, that he would burst it open, and
that she would be punished for resisting the officers of justice. All
was in vain. Laura would not answer a single word. Trembling in every
limb, she listened to his blasphemies and vows of vengeance, till she
had wearied out her persecutor, and her ear was gladdened with the sound
of his departing. He was almost immediately succeeded by his less
ferocious companion, who more civilly begged her to hasten, as their
business would not permit any longer delay. Finding that she would not
answer, he reminded her of the consequences of obstructing the execution
of the law; and threatened, if she continued obstinate, to use force.
Laura sat silent and motionless, using every momentary interval of
quiet, in breathing a hasty prayer for deliverance. The least violent of
the fellows proved the most persevering; yet at last she had the
satisfaction to hear him also retire. Presently a lighter step
approached, and Hargrave called to her. 'Miss Montreville! Laura! Miss
Montreville!' Laura was still silent. He called again, without success.
'Miss Montreville is ill,' cried he aloud, as if to some one at a
distance. 'She is insensible. The door must be forced.' 'No! No!' cried
Laura, determined not to leave him this pretence, 'I am not insensible,
nor ill, if you would leave me in peace.' 'For heaven's sake, then,'
returned he, 'let me speak a few words to you.' 'No,' answered Laura,
'you can say nothing that I wish to hear.' 'I beseech you, I implore
you,' said Hargrave, 'only by one word put it in my power to save you
from these miscreants--say but that one little word, and you are free.'
'Man, man!' cried Laura, vehemently, 'why will you make me abhor you? I
want no freedom but from your persecutions! Begone!' 'Only promise me,'
said Hargrave, lowering his voice, 'only promise me that you will give
up that accursed De Courcy, and I will dismiss these men.' 'Do you curse
him who saved your life! Monster! Leave me! I detest you.' Hargrave
gnawed his lip with passion. 'You shall dearly pay for this obstinacy,'
said he, and fiercely strode away.

In the heat of his wrath, he commanded his coadjutors to force the door;
but the law which makes the home of an Englishman a sacred sanctuary,
extends its precious influence, in some faint degree, to the breasts
even of the dregs of mankind; and these wretches, who would have given
up Laura to any other outrage, hesitated to perpetrate this. They
objected the danger. 'Does your Honour think,' said one of them, 'that
the servants will stand by and allow us to break open the door.' 'I tell
you,' said Hargrave, 'all the men-servants are from home. What do you
fear from a parcel of women?' 'Women can bear witness as well as men,
your Honour; and it might be as much as our necks are worth to be
convicted. But if your Honour could entice her out, we'd soon catch
her.' Hargrave took two or three turns along the lobby, and then
returned to Laura. 'Miss Montreville,' said he, 'my dearest Miss
Montreville, I conjure you to admit me only for a moment. These savages
will wait no longer. They are determined to force your door. Once more I
implore you, before it is too late, let me speak with you. I expect them
every moment.' Laura's breast swelled with indignation at this vile
pretence of kindness. 'Acting under your commands, Sir,' said she, 'I
doubt not that they may even dare this outrage. And let them at their
peril. If the laws of my country cannot protect, they shall avenge me.'
For a moment Hargrave stood confounded at this detection, till anger
replacing shame,--'Very well, Madam,' he cried; 'insult me as you
please, and take the consequences.' He then rejoined his emissaries; and
by bribery and threats endeavoured to prevail upon them to consummate
their violence. The men, unwilling to forfeit the reward of the hazard
and trouble they had already undergone, allured by Hargrave's promises,
and fearing his vengeance, at last agreed to drag their hapless victim
to her doom.

Having taken such instruments as they could find, for the purpose of
forcing the door, they followed Hargrave up stairs, and prepared to
begin their work. At this near prospect of the success of all his
schemes, Hargrave's rage began to cool; and a gleam of tenderness and
humanity reviving in his heart, he shrunk from witnessing the anguish
which he was about to inflict. 'Stop,' said he to his people, who were
approaching the door; 'stay a few moments;' and, putting his hand to his
forehead, he walked about, not wavering in his purpose, but endeavouring
to excuse it to himself. 'It is all the consequence of her own
obstinancy,' said he, suddenly stopping. 'You may go on--No; stay, let
me first get out of this house. Her cries would drive me mad.--Make
haste--lose no time after I am gone. It is better over.'

Besides the motive which he owned, Hargrave was impelled to depart by
the dread of meeting Laura's upbraiding eye, and by the shame of
appearing even to the servants, who were so soon to know his baseness,
an inactive spectator of Laura's distress. He hastened from the house,
and the men proceeded in their work. With dread and horror did Laura
listen to their attempts. Pale, breathless, her hands clenched in
terror, she fixed her strained eyes upon the door, which every moment
seemed yielding; then flying to the window, surveyed in despair the
height, which made escape an act of suicide; then again turning to the
door, tried with her feeble strength to aid its resistance. In vain! It
yielded, and the shock threw Laura upon the ground. The ruffians raised
her, more dead then alive, and were seizing her lily arms to lead her
away; but, with all her native majesty, she motioned them from her. 'You
need not touch me,' said she, 'you see I can resist no further.' With
the composure of despair, she followed them to the hall, where, her
strength failing, she sunk upon a seat. The servants now in pity and
amazement approaching her, she addressed herself to one of them. 'Will
you go with me, my good friend,' said she, 'that you may return and tell
Lady Pelham where to find her niece's corpse!' The girl consented with
tears in her eyes; but one of the fellows cried, 'No; no; she may run
after the coach if she likes, but she don't go within side.' 'Why not?'
said the other, with a brutal leer. 'They may both get home again
together. They'll be free enough soon.' Laura shuddered. 'Where wandered
my senses,' said she, 'when I thought of subjecting any creature to the
chance of a fate like mine! Stay here, my dear, and tell Lady Pelham,
that I charge her, by all her hopes here and hereafter, to seek me
before she sleeps. Let her seek me wherever there is wickedness and
wo--and there, living or dead, I shall be found.' 'Let's have done with
all this nonsense,' said one of the men. 'John, make the coach draw up
close to the door.' The fellow went to do as he was desired; while the
other with a handkerchief prepared to stifle the cries of Laura, in
case she should attempt to move the pity of passengers in the street.
Laura heard the carriage stop, she heard the step let down, and the
sound was like her death knell.

The man hurried her through the hall. He opened the street door--and
Catherine entered with Mr Derwent. Laura, raising her bowed-down head,
uttered a cry of joy. 'I am safe!' she cried, and sunk into the arms of
Catherine.

Mr Derwent immediately directed his servants to seize the fellow who had
held Laura, the other having made his escape upon seeing the arrival of
her deliverers. Laura, soon recovering, told her tale to Mr Derwent, who
ordering the man to be searched, examined the warrant, and declared it
to be false. The danger attending forgery, however, had been avoided,
for there was no magistrate of the same name with that which appeared in
the signature. Hargrave's villany thus fully detected, Laura wished to
dismiss his agent; but Mr Derwent would not permit such atrocity to go
unpunished, and gave up the wretch to the arm of law. He then quitted
Laura, leaving his servant to attend her till Lady Pelham's return and,
worn out with the emotion she had undergone, she threw herself on a bed
to seek some rest.

Early in the evening Lady Pelham returned, and immediately inquired for
her niece. The servants, always attentive and often uncharitable
spectators of the actions of their superiors, had before observed the
encouragement which their mistress gave to Hargrave, and less unwilling
to suspect than Laura, were convinced of Lady Pelham's connivance in his
purpose. None of them therefore choosing to announce the failure of a
scheme in which they believed her so deeply implicated, her questions
produced no information except that Miss Montreville was gone indisposed
to bed. The habitual awe with which the good sense and discernment of
Laura had inspired Lady Pelham, was at present augmented almost to fear
by the consciousness of duplicity. She shrunk from encountering the
glance of quiet scrutiny, the plain direct question which left no room
for prevarication, no choice between simple truth and absolute
falsehood. But curiosity to know the success of the plot, and still more
a desire to discover how far she was suspected of abetting it, prevailed
over her fears; and having before studied the part she was to play, she
entered Laura's apartment.

She found her already risen and prepared to receive her. 'My dear
child,' said her Ladyship in one of her kindest tones, 'I am told you
have been ill. What is the matter?' 'My illness is nothing, Madam,'
answered Laura, 'but I have been alarmed in your absence by the most
daring, the most unprincipled outrage!' 'Outrage, my dear!' cried Lady
Pelham in a voice of the utmost surprise; 'What outrage?' Laura then,
commanding by a powerful effort the imagination which swelled her heart,
related her injuries without comment; pausing at times to observe how
her aunt was affected by the recital. Lady Pelham was all amazement;
which, though chiefly pretended, was partly real. She was surprised at
the lengths to which Hargrave had gone, and even suspected his whole
design, though she was far from intending to discover her sentiments to
her niece. 'This is the most extraordinary thing I ever heard of!' cried
she when Laura had ended. 'What can have been the meaning of this trick?
What can have incited the people?' 'Colonel Hargrave, Madam,' said Laura
without hesitation. 'Impossible, my dear! Hargrave can be no further
concerned in it, than so far as taking advantage of the accident to
extort the promise of a little kindness from you. He would never have
ventured to send the men into my house on such an errand.' 'One of them
confessed to Mr Derwent, before the whole family, that Colonel Hargrave
was his employer.' 'Astonishing!' cried Lady Pelham. 'And what do you
suppose to have been Hargrave's intention?' 'I doubt not, Madam,'
returned Laura, commanding her voice, though resentment flashed from her
eyes, 'I doubt not that his intentions were yet more base and inhuman
than the means he employed. But whatever they were, I am certain he
would never have dared to entertain them, had it not been for the
encouragement which your Ladyship has thought proper to give him.' 'I,
child!' cried Lady Pelham, truth in her colour contradicting the
falsehood of her tongue, 'Surely you do not think that I would encourage
him in such a plot!' 'No, Madam,' answered Laura, 'I hope and believe
that you are incapable of consenting to such wickedness. I allude only
to the general countenance which you have always shewn to Colonel
Hargrave.' Lady Pelham could implicitly rely upon Laura's word; and
finding that she was herself unsuspected, she had leisure to attempt
palliating the offence of her _protegé_. 'That countenance,' returned
she, 'shall be completely withdrawn for the future, if Hargrave does not
explain this strange frolic to my satisfaction.' 'Frolic, Madam!' cried
Laura indignantly. 'If that name belongs to crimes which would disgrace
barbarians, then call this a frolic!' 'Come, my dear girl,' said Lady
Pelham, coaxingly throwing her arm round Laura, 'you are too much, and
I must own, according to present appearances, justly irritated, to talk
of this affair coolly tonight. To-morrow we shall converse about it. Now
let's go to tea.' 'No, Madam,' said Laura with spirit, for she saw
through her aunt's intention of glossing over Hargrave's villany--'I
will never again expose myself to the chance of meeting a wretch whose
crimes are my abhorrence. I will not leave this room till I quit it for
ever. Madam, you have often called me firm. Now I will prove to you that
I am so. Give me the means to go hence in a manner becoming your niece,
or my own limbs shall bear me to Scotland, and on the charity of my
fellow-creatures will I rely for support.' 'I protest, my love,' cried
Lady Pelham, 'you are absolutely in a passion, I never saw you so angry
till now.' 'Your Ladyship never saw me have such reason for anger,'
replied Laura. 'I own I am angry, yet I know that my determination is
right, and I assure you it will outlive the heat with which it is
expressed.'

Had Laura's purpose been more placidly announced it would have roused
Lady Pelham to fury; but even those who have least command over their
tempers have generalship enough to perceive the advantage of the attack;
and the passion of a virago has commonly a patriarchal submission for
its elder-born brother. Lady Pelham saw that Laura was in no humour for
trifling; she knew that her resolutions were not easily shaken; and she
quitted her upon pretence of fatigue, but in reality that she might
consider how to divert her from the purpose which she had announced so
peremptorily.

Laura was every day becoming more necessary to her aunt, and to think of
parting with her was seriously disagreeable. Besides, Laura's departure
would effectually blast the hopes of Hargrave; and what would then
become of all Lady Pelham's prospects of borrowing consequence from the
lovely young Countess of Lincourt? Never wanting in invention, Lady
Pelham thought of a hundred projects for preventing her niece's journey
to Scotland. Her choice was fixed by a circumstance which she could not
exclude from her consideration. The story of Hargrave's seditious plot
was likely soon to be made public. It was known to Mr Derwent, and to
all her own household. Her conscience whispered that her connivance
would be suspected. Mr Derwent might be discreet; but what was to be
expected from the discretion of servants? The story would spread from
the footmen to the waiting-maids, and from these to their ladies, till
it would meet her at every turn. Nor had her imprudent consent left her
the power of disclaiming all concern in it, by forbidding Hargrave her
house, since he would probably revenge himself by disclosing her share
in the strategem. Lady Pelham saw no better success of palliating these
evils, than by dismissing her establishment and returning immediately to
Walbourne; and she hoped, at the same time, that it might not be
impossible to prevail on Laura to change the direction of her journey.
For this purpose she began by beseeching her niece to lay aside thoughts
of retiring to Scotland; and was beginning to recount all the
disadvantages of such a proceeding; but Laura would listen to no
remonstrance on the subject; declaring that, if after what had happened,
she remained in a place where she was liable to such outrage, she should
be herself accountable for whatever evil might be the consequence. Lady
Pelham then proposed an immediate removal to Walbourne, artfully
insinuating that, if any cause of complaint should there arise, Laura
would be near the advice and assistance of her friends at Norwood, and
of Mrs Bolingbroke. Laura was not without some wishes that pointed
towards Walbourne; but she remembered the importunities which she had
there endured, and she firmly resisted giving occasion to their renewal.
Lady Pelham had then recourse to tender upbraidings. 'Was it possible
that Laura, the only hope and comfort of her age, would quit her now,
when she had so endeared herself to the widowed heart, reft of all other
treasure--now when increasing infirmity required her aid--now when the
eye which was so soon to close, was fixed on her as on its last earthly
treasure! Would Laura thus cruelly punish her for a crime in which she
had no share; a crime which she was willing to resent to the utmost of
her niece's wishes!' Lady Pelham talked herself into tears, and few
hearts of nineteen are hard enough to resist the tears of age. Laura
consented to accompany her aunt to Walbourne, provided that she should
never be importuned on the subject of Hargrave, nor even obliged to see
him. These conditions Lady Pelham solemnly promised to fulfil, and, well
pleased, prepared for her journey. Hargrave, however, waited on her
before her departure, and excused himself so well on the score of his
passion, his despair, and his eager desire to be allied to Lady Pelham,
that, after a gentle reprimand, he was again received into favour,
informed of the promises which had been made against him, and warned not
be discouraged if their performance could not immediately be dispensed
with. Of this visit Laura knew nothing; for she adhered to her
resolution of keeping her apartment, nor ever crossed its threshold,
till, on the third day after her perilous adventure, the carriage was at
the door which conveyed her to Walbourne.




CHAPTER XXX


As Lady Pelham's carriage passed the entrance of the avenue which led to
Norwood, Laura sunk into a profound reverie; in the course of which she
settled most minutely the behaviour proper for her first meeting with De
Courcy. She decided on the gesture of unembarrassed cordiality with
which she was to accost him; intending her manner to intimate that she
accounted him a friend, and only a friend. The awkwardness of a private
interview she meant to avoid by going to Norwood next day, at an hour
which she knew that Montague employed in reading aloud to his mother.
All this excellent arrangement, however, was unfortunately useless.
Laura was taking a very early ramble in what had always been her
favourite walk, when, at a sudden turn, she saw De Courcy not three
steps distant. Her white gown shining through the still leafless trees
had caught his attention, the slightest glimpse of her form was
sufficient for the eye of love, and he had advanced prepared to meet
her; while she, thus taken by surprise, stood before him conscious and
blushing. At this confusion, so flattering to a lover, De Courcy's heart
gave one bound of triumphant joy; but he was too modest to ascribe to
love what timidity might so well account for, and he prudently avoided
reminding Laura, even by a look, of either his hopes or his wishes.
Quickly recollecting herself, Laura entered into a conversation which,
though at first reserved and interrupted, returned by degrees to the
confidential manner which De Courcy had formerly won from her under the
character of her father's friend.

This confidence, so precious to him, De Courcy was careful never to
interrupt. From the time of Laura's return, he saw her almost daily. She
made long visits to Mrs De Courcy; he came often to Walbourne; they met
in their walks, in their visits; they spent a week together under Mr
Bolingbroke's roof; yet De Courcy religiously kept his promise, nor ever
wilfully reminded Laura that he had a wish beyond her friendship. Always
gentle, respectful and attentive, he never invited observation by
distinguishing her above others who had equal claims on his politeness.
She only shared his assiduities with every other woman whom he
approached; nor did he betray uneasiness when she, in her turn, received
attentions from others. His prudent self-command, had the effect which
he intended; and Laura, in conversing with him, felt none of the reserve
which may be supposed to attend intercourse with a rejected admirer. His
caution even at times deceived her. She recollected Mrs Douglas's
prophecy, that 'his attachment would soon subside into friendly regard,'
and imagined she saw its accomplishment. 'How happy are men in having
such flexible affections,' thought she with a sigh. 'I wonder whether he
has entirely conquered the passion which, three short months ago, was to
"last through life--beyond life?" I hope he has,' whispered she with a
deeper sigh; and she repeated it again--'I hope he has,'--as if by
repeating it, she would have ascertained that it was her real sentiment.
Yet, at other times, some little inadvertency, unheeded by less
interested observers, would awaken a doubt of De Courcy's self-conquest;
and in that doubt Laura unconsciously found pleasure. She often
reconsidered the arguments which her friend had used to prove that
passion is unnecessary to the happiness of wedded life. She did not
allow that she was convinced by them; but she half wished that she had
had an opportunity of weighing them before she had decided her fate with
regard to De Courcy. Meanwhile, much of her time was spent in his
company, and his presence had ever brought pleasure with it. Week after
week passed agreeably away, and the close of the winter atoned for the
disquiet which had marked its commencement.

During all this time, Laura saw nothing of Hargrave. His visits, indeed,
to Walbourne were more frequent than she supposed, but the only one of
which she had been informed, Lady Pelham affected to announce to her,
advising her to avoid it by spending that day at Norwood. Since their
return from town, her Ladyship had entirely desisted from her
remonstrances in his favour, and Laura hoped that his last outrage had
opened her aunt's eyes to the deformity of his character. And, could
Lady Pelham's end have been pursued without annoyance to any living
being, it would long before have shared the perishable nature of her
other purposes. But whatever conferred the invaluable occasion of
tormenting, was cherished by Lady Pelham as the dearest of her
concerns; and she only waited fit opportunity to shew that she could be
as stubborn in thwarting the wishes of others, as capricious in varying
her own. De Courcy's attachment could not escape her penetration; and as
she was far from intending to desert the cause of Hargrave, she saw,
with displeasure, the progressive advancement of Laura's regard for the
friend of her father. Though she was sufficiently acquainted with Laura
to know that chiding would effect no change in her sentiments or
conduct, she had not temper enough to restrain her upbraidings on this
subject, but varied them with all the skill and perseverance of a
veteran in provocation. 'She did not, she must confess, understand the
delicacy of ladies whose affections could be transferred from one man to
another. She did not see how any modest woman could find two endurable
men in the world. It was a farce to tell her of friendship and
gratitude, and such like stuff. Everybody knew the meaning of a
friendship between a girl of nineteen and a good-looking young fellow of
five-and-twenty. She wondered whether Laura was really wise enough to
imagine that De Courcy could afford to marry her; or whether, if he were
mad enough to think of such a thing, she could be so ungenerous as to
take advantage of his folly, to plunge him into irretrievable poverty;
and this too, when it was well known that a certain young heiress had
prior claims upon him.' Laura at first listened to these harangues with
tolerable _sang froid_; yet they became, she was unconscious why, every
day more provoking. Though she had self-command enough to be silent, her
changing colour announced Lady Pelham's victory, and it was followed up
without mercy or respite. It had, however, no other effect than that of
imposing a restraint when her Ladyship happened to be present; for De
Courcy continued his attentions, and Laura received him with increasing
favour.

Lady Pelham omitted none of the minor occasions of disturbing this
harmonious intercourse. She interrupted their tête à têtes, beset them
in their walks, watched their most insignificant looks, pried into their
most common-place messages, and dexterously hinted to the one whatever
foible she could see or imagine in the other. A casual breath of scandal
soon furnished her with a golden opportunity of sowing dissension, and
she lost no time in taking advantage of the hint. 'It is treating me
like a baby,' said she once to Laura, after opening in form her daily
attack; 'it is treating me like a mere simpleton to expect that you are
to deceive me with your flourishing sentiments about esteem and
gratitude. Have esteem and gratitude the blindness of love? Don't I see
that you overlook in your beloved Mr Montague De Courcy faults which in
another you would think sufficient excuse for any ill treatment that you
chose to inflict?' Laura kept silence; for of late she had found that
her temper could not stand a charge of this kind. 'What becomes of all
your fine high-flown notions of purity, and so forth,' continued Lady
Pelham, 'when you excuse his indiscretions with his mother's _protegée_,
and make a favourite and a plaything of his spoilt bantling?' Laura
turned pale, then reddened violently. 'What protegée? what bantling?'
cried she, quite thrown off her guard. 'I know of no indiscretions--I
have no playthings.'--'What! you pretend not to know that the brat he
takes so much notice of is his own. Did you never hear of his affair
with a pretty girl whom his mamma was training as a waiting-maid for her
fine-lady daughter.' 'Mr De Courcy, Madam!' cried Laura, making a
powerful struggle with her indignation--'He seduce a girl who as a
member of his family was doubly entitled to his protection! Is it
possible that your Ladyship can give credit to such a calumny?'
'Heyday,' cried Lady Pelham, with a provoking laugh, 'a most incredible
occurrence to be sure! And pray why should your immaculate Mr De Courcy
be impeccable any more than other people?' 'I do not imagine, Madam,'
returned Laura, with recovered self-possession, 'that Mr De Courcy, or
any of the human race, is perfectly sinless; but nothing short of proof
shall convince me that he is capable of deliberate wickedness; or even
that the casual transgressions of such a man can be so black in their
nature, so heinous in their degree. It were next to a miracle if one who
makes conscience of guarding his very thoughts, could, with a single
step, make such progress in iniquity.' 'It were a miracle indeed,' said
Lady Pelham, sneeringly, 'if you could be prevailed upon to believe any
thing that contradicts your romantic vagaries. As long as you are
determined to worship Mr De Courcy, you'll never listen to any thing
that brings him down from his pedestal.' 'It is wasting time,' returned
Laura calmly, 'to argue on the improbability of this malicious tale. I
can easily give your Ladyship the pleasure of being able to contradict
it. Mrs Bolingbroke is at Norwood. She will tell me frankly who is the
real father of little Henry, and I shall feel no difficulty in asking
her. Will you have the goodness to lend me the carriage for an hour?' 'A
pretty expedition truly!' cried Lady Pelham, 'and mighty delicate and
dignified it is for a young lady, to run about inquiring into the
pedigree of all the bastards in the county! I assure you, Miss
Montreville, I shall neither countenance nor assist such a scheme!'
'Then, Madam,' answered Laura coolly, 'I shall walk to Norwood. The
claims of dignity, or even of delicacy, are surely inferior to those of
justice and gratitude. But though it should subject me to the scorn of
all mankind, I will do what in me lies to clear his good name whose
kindness ministered the last comforts that sweetened the life of my
father.'

The manner in which these words were pronounced, shewed Lady Pelham that
resistance was useless. She was far from wishing to quarrel with the De
Courcy family, and she now began to fear that she should appear the
propagator of this scandal. Having little time to consult the means of
safety, since Laura was already leaving the room, she hastily said, 'I
suppose in your explanations with Mrs Bolingbroke, you will give me up
for your authority?' 'No, Madam,' replied Laura, with a scorn which she
could not wholly suppress, 'your Ladyship has no right to think so at
the moment when I am shewing such concern for the reputation of my
friends.' Lady Pelham would have fired at this disdain, but her
_quietus_ was at hand--she was afraid of provoking Laura to expose her,
and therefore she found it perfectly possible to keep her temper. 'If
you are resolved to go,' said she, 'you had better wait till I order the
carriage; I fear we shall have rain.' Laura at first refused; but Lady
Pelham pressed her, with so many kind concerns for a slight cold which
she had, that though she saw through the veil, she suffered her Ladyship
to wear it undisturbed. The carriage was ordered, and Laura hastened to
Norwood.

Though she entertained not the slightest doubt of De Courcy's integrity,
she was restless and anxious. It was easy to see that her mind was
pre-occupied during the few minutes which passed before, taking leave of
Mrs De Courcy, she begged Mrs Bolingbroke to speak with her apart.
Harriet followed her into another room; and Laura, with much more
embarrassment than she had expected to feel, prepared to begin her
interrogation. Harriet, from the thoughtful aspect of her companion,
anticipating something of importance, stood gravely waiting to hear what
she had to say; while Laura was confused by the awkwardness of
explaining her reason for the question she was about to ask. 'I have
managed this matter very ill,' said she at last, pursuing her thoughts
aloud. 'I have entered on it with so much formality, that you must
expect some very serious affair; and, after all, I am only going to ask
a trifling question. Will you tell me who is the father of my pretty
little Henry?' Harriet looked surprised, and answered,--'Really, my
dear, I am not sure that I dare. You inquired the same thing once
before; and just when I was going to tell you, Montague looked so
terrible, that I was forced to hold my tongue. But what makes you ask?
What! You won't tell? Then I know how it is. My prophecy has proved
true, and the good folks have given him to Montague himself. Ah! What a
tell-tale face you have, Laura! And who has told you this pretty story?'
'It is of no consequence,' replied Laura, 'that you should know my
authority, provided that I have yours to contradict the slander.' 'You
shall have better authority than mine,' returned Harriet. 'Those who
were malicious enough to invent such a tale of Montague, might well
assert that his sister employed falsehood to clear him. You shall hear
the whole from nurse Margaret herself; and her evidence cannot be
doubted. Come, will you walk to the cottage and hear what she has to
say?'

They found Margaret alone; and Harriet, impatient till her brother
should be fully justified, scarcely gave herself time to answer the old
woman's civilities, before she entered on her errand. 'Come, nurse,'
said she, with all her natural frankness of manner, 'I have something
particular to say to you. Let's shut the door and sit down. Do you know
somebody has been malicious enough to tell Miss Montreville that
Montague is little Henry's father.' Margaret lifted up her hands and
eyes. 'My young master, Madam!' cried she--'He go to bring shame and
sorrow into any honest man's family! If you'll believe me, Miss,'
continued she, turning to Laura, 'this is, begging your pardon, the
wickedest lie that ever was told.' Laura was about to assure her that
she gave no credit to the calumny, but Harriet, who had a double reason
for wishing that her friend should listen to Margaret's tale,
interrupted her, saying, 'Nurse, I am sure nothing could convince her so
fully as hearing the whole story from your own lips. I brought her
hither on purpose; and you may trust her, I assure you, for she is just
such a wise prudent creature as you always told me that I ought to be.'
'Ah, Madam,' answered Margaret, 'I know that; for John says she is the
prettiest-behaved young lady he ever saw; and says how fond my lady is
of her, and others too besides my lady, though it is not for servants to
be making remarks.' 'Come, then, nurse,' said Harriet, 'sit down between
us; and tell us the whole sad story of my poor foster-sister, and clear
your friend Montague from this aspersion.' Margaret did as she was
desired. 'Ah, yes!' said she, tears lending to her eyes a transient
brightness, 'I can talk of it now! Many a long evening John and I speak
of nothing else. She always used to sit between us,--but now we both sit
close together. But we are growing old,' continued she, in a more
cheerful tone, 'and in a little while we shall see them all again. We
had three of the prettiest boys!--My dear young lady, you will soon have
children of your own, but never set your heart upon them, nor be too
proud of them, for that is only provoking Providence to take them away.'
'I shall probably never have so much reason,' said Harriet, 'as you had
to be proud of your Jessy.' The mother's pride had survived its object;
and it brightened Margaret's faded countenance, as, pressing Harriet's
hand between her own, she cried, 'Ah, bless you! you were always kind to
her. She was indeed the flower of my little flock; and when the boys
were taken away, she was our comfort for all. But I was too proud of
her. Five years since, there was not her like in all the country round.
A dutiful child, too, and never made us sad or sorrowful till--and such
a pretty modest creature! But I was too proud of her.'

Margaret stopped, and covered her face with the corner of her apron.
Sympathizing tears stood in Laura's eyes; while Harriet sobbed aloud at
the remembrance of the play-fellow of her infancy. The old woman first
recovered herself. 'I shall never have done at this rate,' said she,
and, drying her eyes, turned to address the rest of her tale to Laura.
'Well, Ma'am, a gentleman who used to come a-visiting to the castle, by
ill fortune chanced to see her; and ever after that he noticed her and
spoke to her; and flattered me up, too, saying, what a fine-looking
young creature she was, and so well brought up too, and what a pity it
was that she should be destined for a tradesman's wife. So, like a fool
as I was, I thought no harm of his fine speeches, because Jessy always
said he behaved quite modest and respectful like. But John, to be sure,
was angry, and said that a tradesman was her equal, and that he hoped
her rosy cheeks would never give her notions above her station; and,
says he,--I am sure many and many a time I have thought of his
words--says he, 'God grant I never see worse come of her than to be an
honest tradesman's wife.' My young master, too, saw the gentleman one
day speaking to her; and he was so good as advise her himself, and told
her that the gentleman meant nothing honest by all his fine speeches. So
after that, she would never stop with him at all, nor give ear to a word
of his flatteries; but always ran away from him, telling him to say
those fine things to his equals. So, one unlucky day I had some matters
to be done in the town, and Jessy said she would like to go, and poor
foolish I was so left to myself that I let her go. So she dressed
herself in her clean white gown.--I remember it as were it but
yesterday. I went to the door with her, charging her to be home early.
She shook hands with me. Jessy, says I, you look just like a bride. So
she smiled. No, mother, says she, I shan't leave home so merrily the day
I leave it for all--and I never saw my poor child smile again. So she
went, poor lamb, little thinking!--and I stood in the door looking after
her, thinking, like a fool as I was, that my young master need not have
thought it strange though a gentleman had taken her for a wife, for
there were not many ladies that looked like her.'

Margaret rested her arms upon her knees, bent her head over them, made a
pause, and then began again. 'All day I was merry as a lark, singing and
making every thing clean in our little habitation here, where I thought
we should sit down together so happy when John came home at night from
the castle. So it was getting darkish before my work was done, and then
I began to wonder what was become of Jessy; and many a time I went
across the green to see if there was any sight of her. At last John came
home, and I told him that I was beginning to be frightened; but he
laughed at me, and said she had perhaps met with some of her comrades,
and was gone to take her tea with them. So we sat down by the fire; but
I could not rest, for my mind misgave me sadly; so says I, John, I will
go and see after my girl. Well, says he, we may as well go and meet
her.--Alas! Alas! a sad meeting was that! We went to the door; I opened
it, and somebody fell against me.--It was Jessy. She looked as dead as
she did the day I laid her in her coffin; and all her pretty cheek was
blue, and her pretty mouth, that used to smile so sweetly in my face
when she was a baby on my knee, it was all bloody. And her pretty
shining hair that I used to comb so often--Oh woe, woe is me! How could
I see such a sight and live.'

The mother wrung her withered hands, and sobbed as if her heart were
breaking. Laura laid her arms kindly round old Margaret's neck, for
misfortune made the poor and the stranger her equal and her friend. She
offered no words of unavailing consolation, but pitying tears trickled
fast down her cheeks; while Mrs Bolingbroke, her eyes flashing indignant
fires, exclaimed, 'Surely the curse of heaven will pursue that wretch!'
'Alas!' said Margaret, 'I fear I cursed him too; but I was in a manner
beside myself then. God forgive both him and me! My poor child never
cursed him. All that I could say she would not tell who it was that had
used her so. She said she should never bring him to justice; and always
prayed that his own conscience might be his only punishment. So from the
first we saw that her heart was quite broken; for she would never speak
nor look up, nor let me do the smallest thing for her, but always said
it was not fit that I should wait on such a one as she. Well, one night,
after we were all a-bed, a letter was flung in at the window of Jessy's
closet, and she crept out of her bed to take it. I can shew it you,
Miss, for it was under her pillow when she died.' Margaret, unlocking a
drawer, took out a letter and gave it to Laura, who read in it these
words:

     'My dear Jessy, I am the most miserable wretch upon earth. I
     wish I had been upon the rack the hour I met you. I am sure I
     have been so ever since. Do not curse me, dear Jessy! Upon my
     soul, I had far less thought of being the ruffian I have been
     to you, than I have at this moment of blowing out my own
     brains. I wish to heaven that I had been in your own station
     that I might have made you amends for the injury I have done.
     But you know it is impossible for me to marry you. I inclose a
     bank-bill for £100, and I will continue to pay you the same sum
     annually while you live, though you should never consent to see
     me more. If you make me a father, no expence shall be spared to
     provide the means of secrecy and comfort. No accommodation
     which a wife could have shall be withheld from you. Tell me if
     there be any thing more than I can do for you. I shall never
     forgive myself for what I have done. I abhor myself, and from
     this hour, I forswear all woman-kind for your sake. Once more,
     dear Jessy, pardon me I implore you.'

This letter was without signature; but the hand-writing was familiar to
Laura, and could not be mistaken. It was Hargrave's. Shuddering at this
new proof of his depravity, Laura inwardly offered a thanksgiving that
she had escaped all connection with such a monster. 'You may trust my
friend with the wretch's name,' said Harriet, anxious that Laura's
conviction should be complete. 'She will make no imprudent use of it.'
'I should never have known it myself had it not been for this letter,'
answered Margaret. 'But my poor child wished to answer it, and she was
not able to carry the answer herself, so she was obliged to ask her
father to go with it. And first she made us both promise on the Bible,
never to bring him either to shame or punishment; and then she told us
that it was that same Major Hargrave that used to speak her so fair.
Here is the scroll that John took of her answer.'

     'Sir, I return your money, for it can be of no use where I am
     going. I will never curse you; but trust I shall to the last
     have pity on you, who had no pity on me. I fear your sorrow is
     not right repentance; for, if it was, you would never think of
     committing a new sin by taking your own life, but rather of
     making reparation for the great evil you have done. Not that I
     say this in respect of wishing to be your wife. My station
     makes that unsuitable, more especially now when I should be a
     disgrace to any man. And I must say, a wicked person would be
     as unsuitable among my friends; for my parents are honest
     persons, although their daughter is so unhappy as to bring
     shame on them. I shall not live long enough to disgrace them
     any farther, so pray inquire no more of me, nor take the
     trouble to send me money, for I will not buy my coffin with the
     wages of shame; and I shall need nothing else. So, wishing that
     my untimely end may bring you to a true repentance, I remain,
     Sir, the poor dying disgraced,

                                  'JESSY WILSON.'

'Ah, Miss,' continued Margaret, wiping from the paper the drops which
had fallen on it, 'my poor child's prophecy was true. She always said
she would just live till her child was born, and then lay her
dishonoured head and her broken heart in the grave. My Lady and Miss
Harriet there were very kind, and my young master himself was so good as
to promise that he would act the part of a father to the little orphan.
And he used to argue with her that she should submit to the chastisement
that was laid upon her, and that she might find some comfort still; but
she always said that her chastisement was less than she deserved, but
that she could never wish to live to be 'a very scorn of men, an outcast
and an alien among her mother's children.' So the day that little Henry
was born, she was doing so well that we were in hopes she would still be
spared to us; but she knew better; and, when I was sitting by her, she
pulled me close to her and said, 'Mother,' says she, looking pleased
like, 'the time of my release is at hand now,' and then she charged me
never to give poor little Henry to his cruel father. I had not the power
to say a word to her, but sat hushing the baby, with my heart like to
break. So, by and by, she said to me again; but very weak and low like,
'my brothers lie side by side in the churchyard, lay me at their feet;
it is good enough for me.' So she never spoke more, but closed her
eyes, and slipped quietly away, and left her poor old mother.'

A long paused followed Margaret's melancholy tale. 'Are you convinced,
my friend,' said Mrs Bolingbroke at length. 'Fully,' answered Laura, and
returned to silent and thankful meditation. 'My master,' said Margaret,
'has made good his promise to poor Jessy. He has shewn a father's
kindness to her boy. He paid for his nursing, and forces John to take a
board for him that might serve any gentleman's son; and now it will be
very hard if the end of all his goodness is to get himself ill spoken
of; and nobody saying a word against him that was the beginning of all
this mischief. But that is the way of the world.' 'It is so,' said
Laura. 'And what can better warn us that the earth was never meant for
our resting-place. The "raven" wings his way through it triumphant. The
"dove" finds no rest for the sole of her foot, and turns to the ark from
whence she came.'

Mrs Bolingbroke soon after took leave of her nurse, and the ladies
proceeded in their walk towards Walbourne. Harriet continued to express
the warmest detestation of the profligacy of Hargrave, while Laura's
mind was chiefly occupied in endeavouring to account for De Courcy's
desire to conceal from her the enormity which had just come to her
knowledge. Unable to divine his reason, she applied to Harriet. 'Why my
dear,' said she, 'should your brother have silenced you on a subject
which could only be mentioned to his honour?' 'He never told me his
reasons,' said Harriet smiling, 'but if you will not be angry I may try
to guess them.' 'I think,' said Laura, 'that thus cautioned, I may
contrive to keep my temper; so speak boldly.' 'Then, my dear,' said
Harriet, 'I may venture to say that I think he suspected you of a
partiality for this wretch, and would not shock you by a full disclosure
of his depravity. And I know,' added she, in a voice tremulous with
emotion, 'that in him this delicacy was virtue; for the peace of his
life depends on securing your affectionate, your exclusive preference.'
'Ah, Harriet, you have guessed right.--Yes! I see it all. Dear generous
De Courcy!' cried Laura, and burst into tears. Harriet had not time to
comment upon this agitation; for the next moment De Courcy himself was
at her side. For the first time, Laura felt embarrassed and distressed
by his presence. The words she had just uttered still sounded in her
ear, and she trembled lest they had reached that of De Courcy. She was
safe. Her exclamation was unheard by Montague,--but he instantly
observed her tears, and they banished from his mind every other idea
than that of Laura in sorrow. He paid his compliments like one whose
attention was distracted, and scarcely answered what his sister
addressed to him. Mrs Bolingbroke inwardly enjoying his abstraction and
Laura's embarrassment, determined not to spoil an opportunity which she
judged so favourable to her brother's suit. 'This close walk,' said she
with a sly smile, 'was never meant for a trio. It is just fit for a pair
of lovers. Now I have letters to write, and if you two will excuse
me'--De Courcy colouring crimson, had not presence of mind to make any
reply, while Laura, though burning with shame and vexation, answered
with her habitual self-command, 'Oh, pray my dear, use no ceremony. Here
are none but _friends_.' The emphasis which she laid upon the last word,
wrung a heavy sigh from De Courcy; who, while his sister was taking
leave, was renewing his resolution not to disappoint the confidence of
Laura.

The very circumstances which Mrs Bolingbroke had expected should lead to
a happy eclaircissement, made this interview the most reserved and
comfortless which the two friends had ever had. Laura was too conscious
to talk of the story which she had just heard, and she was too full of
it to enter easily upon any other subject. With her gratitude for the
delicacy which De Courcy had observed towards her, was mingled a keen
feeling of humiliation at the idea that he had discovered her secret
before it had been confided to him; for we can sometimes confess a
weakness which we cannot without extreme mortification see detected. Her
silence and depression infected De Courcy; and the few short constrained
sentences which were spoken during their walk, formed a contrast to the
general vivacity of their conversations. Laura however recovered her
eloquence as soon as she found herself alone with Lady Pelham. With all
the animation of sensibility, she related the story of the ill-fated
Jessy; and disclosing in confidence the name of her destroyer, drew, in
the fulness of her heart, a comparison between the violator of laws
human and divine, owing his life to the mercy of the wretch whom he had
undone, and the kind adviser of inexperienced youth, the humane
protector of forsaken infancy. Lady Pelham quietly heard her to an end;
and then wrinkling her eyelids, and peeping through them with her
glittering blue eyes, she began, 'Do you know, my dear, I never met with
prejudices so strong as yours? When will you give over looking for
prodigies? Would any mortal but you expect a gay young man to be as
correct as yourself? As for your immaculate Mr De Courcy, with his sage
advices, I think it is ten to one that he wanted to keep the girl for
himself. Besides, I'll answer for it, Hargrave would have bid farewell
to all his indiscretions if you would have married him.' 'Never name it,
Madam,' cried Laura warmly, 'if you would not banish me from your
presence. His marriage with me would have been itself a crime; a crime
aggravated by being, as if in mockery, consecrated to heaven. For _my_
connection with such a person no name is vile enough.' 'Well, well,'
said Lady Pelham, shrugging her shoulders, 'I prophesy that one day you
will repent having refused to share a title with the handsomest man in
England.' 'All distinctions between right and wrong,' returned Laura,
'must first be blotted from my mind. The beauty of his person is no more
to me than the shining colours of an adder; and the rank which your
Ladyship prizes so highly, would but render me a more conspicuous mark
for the infamy in which his wife must share.'

Awed by the lightnings of Laura's eye, Lady Pelham did not venture to
carry the subject farther for the present. She had of late been watching
an opportunity of procuring the re-admission of Hargrave to the presence
of his mistress; but this fresh discovery had served, if possible, to
widen the breach. Hargrave's fiery temper submitted with impatience to
the banishment which he had so well deserved, and he constantly urged
Lady Pelham to use her authority on his behalf. Lady Pelham, though
conscious that this authority had no existence, was flattered by having
power ascribed to her, and promised at some convenient season to
interfere. Finding herself, however, considerably embarrassed by a
promise which she could not fulfil without hazarding the loss of Laura,
she was not sorry that an opportunity occurred of evading the
performance of her agreement. She therefore acquainted Hargrave with
Laura's recent discovery, declaring that she could not ask her niece to
overlook entirely so great an irregularity. From a regard to the promise
of secrecy which she had given to Laura, as well as in common prudence,
Lady Pelham had resolved not to mention the De Courcy family as the
fountain from which she had drawn her intelligence. Principle and
prudence sometimes governed her Ladyship's resolutions, but seldom
swayed her practice. In the first interview with Hargrave which followed
this rational determination, she was led by the mere vanity of a babbler
to give such hints as not only enabled him to trace the story of his
shame to Norwood, but inclined him to fix the publishing of it upon
Montague.

From the moment when Hargrave first unjustly suspected Laura of a
preference for De Courcy, his heart had rankled with an enmity
which a sense of its ingratitude served only to aggravate. The cool
disdain with which De Courcy treated him--a strong suspicion of his
attachment,--above all, Laura's avowed esteem and regard--inflamed this
enmity to the bitterest hatred. Hopeless as he was of succeeding in his
designs by any fair or honourable means, he might have entertained
thoughts of relinquishing his suit; and of seeking, in a match of
interest, the means of escape from his embarrassments: but that Laura,
with all her unequalled charms, should be the prize of De Courcy, that
in her he should obtain all that beauty, affluence, and love could give,
was a thought not to be endured. Lady Pelham, too, more skilled to
practise on the passions of others than to command her own, was
constantly exciting him, by hints of De Courcy's progress in the favour
of Laura; while Lambert, weary of waiting for the tedious accomplishment
of his own scheme, continually goaded him, with sly sarcasms on his
failure in the arts of persuasion, and on his patience in submitting to
be baffled in his wishes by a haughty girl. In the heat of his
irritation, Hargrave often swore that no power on earth should long
delay the gratification of his love and his revenge. But to marry a
free-born British woman against her consent, is, in these enlightened
times, an affair of some difficulty; and Hargrave, in his cooler
moments, perceived that the object of three years eager pursuit was
farther than ever from his attainment.

Fortune seemed in every respect to oppose the fulfilment of his designs,
for his regiment at this time received orders to prepare to embark for
America; and Lord Lincourt, who had discovered his nephew's ruinous
connection with Lambert, had influence to procure, from high authority,
a hint that Hargrave would be expected to attend his duty on the other
side of the Atlantic.

The news of this arrangement Hargrave immediately conveyed to Lady
Pelham, urging her to sanction any means which could be devised for
making Laura the companion of his voyage. Lady Pelham hesitated to carry
her complaisance so far; but she resolved to make the utmost use of the
time which intervened to promote the designs of her favourite. Her
Ladyship was not at any time much addicted to the communication of
pleasurable intelligence, and the benevolence of her temper was not
augmented by a prospect of the defeat of a plan in which her vanity was
so much interested. She therefore maliciously withheld from her niece a
piece of information so likely to be heard with joy. It reached Laura,
however, by means of one who was ever watchful for her gratification. De
Courcy no sooner ascertained the truth of the report, than he hastened
to convey it to Laura.

He found her alone, and was welcomed with all her accustomed cordiality.
'I am sorry,' said he, with a smile which contradicted his words, 'I am
sorry to be the bearer of bad news to you; but I could not deny myself
the edification of witnessing your fortitude--Do you know that you are
on the point of losing the most assiduous admirer that ever woman was
blessed with? In three weeks Colonel Hargrave embarks for America. Nay,
do not look incredulous. I assure you it is true.' 'Thank Heaven,' cried
Laura, 'I shall once more be in peace and safety!' 'Oh, fie! Is this
your regret for so ardent a lover? Have you no feeling?' 'Just such a
feeling as the poor man had when he escaped from beneath the sword that
hung by a hair. Indeed, Mr De Courcy, I cannot tell you to what a degree
he has embittered the two last years of my life. But I believe,'
continued she, blushing very deeply, 'I need not explain to you any of
my feelings towards Colonel Hargrave, since I find you have I know not
what strange faculty of divining them.' Assisted by a conversation which
he had had with his sister, De Courcy easily understood Laura's meaning.
Respectfully taking her hand, 'Pardon me,' said he, in a low voice, 'if
I have ever ventured to guess what it was your wish to conceal from me.'
'Oh, believe me,' cried Laura, with a countenance and manner of mingled
candour and modesty, 'there is not a thought of my heart that I wish to
conceal from you; since from you, even my most humbling weaknesses are
sure of meeting with delicacy and indulgence. But since you are so good
an augur,' added she, with an ingenuous smile, 'I trust you perceive
that I shall need no more delicacy or indulgence upon the same score.'
The fascinating sweetness of her looks and voice, for the first time
beguiled De Courcy of his promised caution. 'Dear, dear Laura,' he
cried, fondly pressing her hand to his breast, 'it is I who have need of
indulgence, and I must--I must sue for it. I must repeat to you that--'
Laura's heart sprung to her lips, and unconsciously snatching away her
hand, she stood in breathless expectation of what was to follow.
'Madman, that I am!' cried De Courcy, recalled to recollection by her
gesture,--'whither am I venturing!' That was precisely what of all
things Laura was most desirous to know; and she remained with her eyes
fixed on the ground, half dreading the confidence, half the timidity of
her lover. A momentary glance at the speaking countenance of Laura,
glowing with confusion, yet brightened with trembling pleasure, awakened
the strongest hopes that ever had warmed De Courcy's bosom. 'Beloved
Laura,' said he, again tenderly approaching her, 'remember I am but
human. Cease to treat me with this beguiling confidence. Cease to
bewitch me with these smiles, which are so like all that I wish, or
suffer me to--' Laura started, as her attention was drawn by some one
passing close to the ground window near which they were standing. 'Ah!'
cried she, in a tone of vexation, 'there is my evil genius. Colonel
Hargrave is come into the house. He will be here this instant. Excuse me
for driving you away. I beseech you do not remain a moment alone with
him.'

Laura was not mistaken. She had scarcely spoken, ere, with a dark cloud
on his brow, Hargrave entered. He bowed to Laura, who was advancing
towards the door. 'I am afraid, Madam, I interrupt you,' said he,
darting a ferocious scowl upon De Courcy. Laura, without deigning even a
single glance in reply, left the room. Hargrave, as he passed the
window, had observed the significant attitude of the lovers; and his
jealousy and rage were inflamed to the uttermost by the scorn which he
had endured in the presence of his rival. Fiercely stalking up to De
Courcy, 'Is it to you, Sir,' said he, 'that I am indebted for this
insolence?' 'No Sir,' answered De Courcy, a little disdainfully. 'I have
not the honour of regulating Miss Montreville's civilities.' 'This is a
paltry evasion,' cried Hargrave. 'Is it not to your misrepresentations
of a youthful indiscretion that I owe Miss Montreville's present
displeasure?' 'I am not particularly ambitious of the character of an
informer,' answered De Courcy; and taking his hat wished Hargrave a
stately good morning. 'Stay, Sir!' cried Hargrave, roughly seizing him
by the arm. 'I must have some further conversation with you--You don't
go yet.' 'I am not disposed to ask your permission,' returned De Courcy;
and coolly liberating his arm, walked out of the house. Boiling with
rage, Hargrave followed him. 'It is easy to see, Sir,' said he, 'from
whence you borrow a spirit that never was natural to you--Your
presumption builds upon the partiality of that fickle capricious woman.
But observe, Sir, that I have claims on her; claims which she herself
was too happy in allowing; and no man shall dare to interfere with
them.' 'I shall dare,' returned De Courcy, anger kindling in his eyes,
'to inquire by what right you employ such expressions in regard to Miss
Montreville; and whether my spirit be my own or not, you shall find it
sufficient to prevent your holding such language in my presence.' 'In
your presence, or the presence of all the devils,' cried De Courcy, 'I
will maintain my right; and, if you fancy that it interferes with any
claim of yours, you know how to obtain satisfaction. There is but one
way to decide the business.' 'I am of your opinion,' replied De Courcy,
'that there is one way, provided that we can mutually agree to bide by
it; and that is, an appeal to Miss Montreville herself.' Hargrave turned
pale, and his lip quivered with rage. 'A mode of decision, no doubt,'
said he, 'which your vanity persuades you will be all in your favour!
No, no, Sir, our quarrel must be settled by means in which even your
conceit cannot deny my equality.' 'By a brace of pistols, you mean of
course,' said De Courcy, coolly; 'but I frankly tell you. Colonel
Hargrave, that my notions must have changed before I can find the
satisfaction of a gentleman in being murdered; and my principles, before
I shall seek it in murdering you.' 'Curse on your hypocrisy!' cried
Hargrave. 'Keep this canting to cozen girls, and let me avenge my wrongs
like a man, or the world shall know you, Sir.' 'Do you imagine,' said De
Courcy, with a smile of calm disdain, 'that I am to be terrified into
doing what I tell you I think wrong, by the danger of a little
misrepresentation? You may, if you think fit, tell the world that I will
not stake my life in a foolish quarrel, nor wilfully send an unrepenting
sinner to his great account; and, if you go on to ascribe for my
forbearance any motive which is derogatory to my character, I may, if
_I_ think fit, obtain justice as a peacable citizen ought; or I may
leave you undisturbed the glory of propagating a slander which even you
yourself believe to be groundless.'

De Courcy's coolness served only to exasperate his adversary. 'Truce
with this methodistical jargon!' cried he fiercely. 'It may impose upon
women, but I see through it, Sir--see that it is but a miserable trick
to escape what you dare not meet.' 'Dare not!' cried De Courcy,
lightnings flashing from his eye. 'My nerves have failed me, then,
since'--He stopped abruptly, for he scorned at such a moment to remind
his antagonist of the courageous effort to which he owed his life.
'Since when!' cried Hargrave, more and more enraged, as the recollection
which De Courcy had recalled, placed before him the full turpitude of
his conduct.--'Do you think I owe you thanks for a life which you have
made a curse to me, by cheating me of its dearest pleasures. But may
tortures be my portion if I do not foil you!'

The latter part of this dialogue was carried on in a close shady lane
which branched off from the avenue of Walbourne. The dispute was
proceeding with increasing warmth on both sides when it was interrupted
by the appearance of Laura. From a window she had observed the gentlemen
leave the house together; had watched Hargrave's angry gestures, and
seen De Courcy accompany him into the by-path. The evil which she had so
long dreaded seemed now on the point of completion; and alarm leaving no
room for reserve, she followed them with her utmost speed.

'Oh, Mr De Courcy,' she cried, with a look and attitude of most earnest
supplication, 'for mercy leave this madman!--If you would not make me
for ever miserable, carry this no further--I entreat--I implore you.
Fear for me, if you fear not for yourself.' The tender solicitude for
the safety of his rival, which Hargrave imagined her words and gestures
to express, the triumphant delight which they called up to the eyes of
De Courcy, exasperated Hargrave beyond all bounds of self-command.
Frantic with jealousy and rage, he drew, and rushed fiercely on De
Courcy; but Montague having neither fear nor anger to disturb his
presence of mind, parried the thrust with his cane, closed with his
adversary before he could recover, wrested the weapon from his hand; and
having calmly ascertained that no person could be injured by its fall,
threw it over the fence into the adjoining field. Then taking Hargrave
aside, he whispered that he would immediately return to him; and, giving
his arm to Laura, led her towards the house.

She trembled violently, and big tears rolled down her colourless cheeks,
as, vainly struggling with her emotion, she said, 'Surely you will not
endanger a life so precious, so'--She was unable to proceed; but, laying
her hand on De Courcy's arm, she raised her eyes to his face, with such
a look of piteous appeal as reached his very soul. Enchanted to find his
safety the object of such tender interest, he again forgot his caution;
and, fondly supporting with his arm the form which seemed almost sinking
to the earth, 'What danger would I not undergo,' he cried, 'to purchase
such concern as this! Be under no alarm, dear Miss Montreville. Even if
my sentiments in regard to duelling were other than they are, no
provocation should tempt me to implicate your revered name in a quarrel
which would, from its very nature, become public.' Somewhat
tranquillized by his words, Laura walked silently by his side till they
reached the house, when, in a cheerful tone, he bade her farewell. 'A
short farewell,' said he, 'for I must see you again this evening.'
Laura could scarcely prevail on herself to part from him. 'May I trust
you?' said she, with a look of anxiety that spoke volumes. 'Securely,
dearest Laura,' answered he. 'He whom you trust needs no other motive
for rectitude.' He then hastened from her into the field, whither he had
thrown Hargrave's sword; and having found it, sprung over into the lane
where he had left its owner. Gracefully presenting it to him, De Courcy
begged pardon for having deprived him of it, 'though,' added he, 'I
believe you are now rather disposed to thank me for preventing the
effects of a momentary irritation.' Hargrave took his sword, and, in
surly silence walked on; then, suddenly stopping, he repeated that there
was only one way in which the quarrel could be decided; and asked De
Courcy whether he was determined to refuse him satisfaction. 'The only
satisfaction,' returned De Courcy, 'which is consistent with my notions
of right and wrong, I will give you now, on the spot. It is not to my
information that you owe Miss Montreville's displeasure. Circumstances,
which I own were wholly foreign to any consideration of your interests,
induced me to keep your secret almost as if it had been my own; and it
is from others that she has learnt a part of your conduct, which, you
must give me leave to say, warrants, even on the ground of modern
honour, my refusal to treat you as an equal.' 'Insolent!' cried
Hargrave, 'Leave me--avoid me, if you would not again provoke me to
chastise you, unarmed as you are.' 'My horses wait for me at the gate,'
said De Courcy, coolly proceeding by his side, 'and your way seems to
lie in the same direction as mine.'

The remainder of the way was passed in silence. At the gate, De Courcy
mounting his horse, bid his rival good morning, which the other returned
with an ungracious bow. De Courcy rode home, and Hargrave, finding
himself master of the field, returned to Walbourne. There he exerted his
utmost influence with Lady Pelham to procure an opportunity of excusing
himself to Laura. Lady Pelham confessed that she could not venture to
take the tone of command, lest she should drive Laura to seek shelter
elsewhere; but she promised to contrive an occasion for an interview
which he might prolong at his pleasure, provided such a one could be
found without her apparent interference. With this promise he was
obliged for the present to content himself, for, during his stay, Laura
did not appear. She passed the day in disquiet. She could not rest. She
could not employ herself. She dreaded lest the interview of the morning
should have been only preparatory to one of more serious consequence.
She told herself a hundred times that she was sure of De Courcy's
principles; and yet feared as if they had been unworthy of confidence.
He had promised to see her in the evening, and she anxiously expected
the performance of his promise. She knew that if he came while Lady
Pelham was in the way, her Ladyship would be too vigilant a guard to let
one confidential word be exchanged. She therefore, with a
half-pardonable cunning, said not a word of De Courcy's promised visit;
and as soon as her aunt betook herself to her afternoon's nap, stole
from the drawing-room to receive him. Yet perhaps she never met him with
less semblance of cordiality. She blushed and stammered while she
expressed her hopes that the morning's dispute was to have no further
consequences, and apologized for the interest she took in it, in
language more cold than she would have used to a mere stranger. Scarcely
could the expression of tenderness have delighted the lover like this
little ill-concealed affectation, the first and the last which he ever
witnessed in Laura Montreville. 'Ah, dearest Laura,' cried he, 'it is
too late to retract--You have said that my safety was dear to you; owned
that it was for _me_ you feared this morning, and you shall not cancel
your confession.' Laura's colour deepened to crimson, but she made no
other reply. Then, with a more timid voice and air, De Courcy said, 'I
would have told you _then_ what dear presumptuous hopes your anxiety
awakened, but that I feared to extort from your agitation what perhaps a
cooler moment might refuse me. My long-loved, ever dear Laura, will you
pardon me these hopes? Will you not speak to me?--Not one little word to
tell me that I am not too daring.' Laura spoke not even that little
word. She made a faint struggle to withdraw the hand which De Courcy
pressed. Yet the lover read the expressions of her half-averted face,
and was satisfied.




CHAPTER XXXI


'Pray,' said Lady Pelham to her niece, 'what might you and your paragon
be engaged in for the hour and a half you were together this evening?'

'We were discussing a very important subject, Madam,' answered Laura,
mustering all her confidence.

'May I be permitted to inquire into the nature of it?' returned Lady
Pelham, covering her spleen with a thin disguise of ceremony.

'Certainly, Madam,' replied Laura. 'You may remember I once told you
that if ever I received addresses which I could with honour reveal, I
should bespeak your Ladyship's patience for my tale. Mr De Courcy was
talking of marriage, Madam; and--and I--'

'Oh, mighty well, Miss Montreville,' cried Lady Pelham, swelling with
rage, 'I comprehend you perfectly. You may spare your modesty. Keep all
these airs and blushes till you tell Colonel Hargrave, that all your
fine high-flown passion for him has been quite at the service of the
next man you met with!'

Laura's eyes filled with tears of mortification, yet she meekly
answered, 'I am conscious that the degrading attachment of which I was
once the sport merits your upbraidings; and indeed they have not been
its least punishment.' She paused for a moment, and then added with an
insinuating smile. 'I can bear that you should reproach me with my new
choice, for inconstancy is the prescriptive right of woman, and nothing
else can be objected to my present views.'

'Oh, far be it from me!' cried Lady Pelham, scorn and anger throwing her
whole little person into active motion, 'far be it from me to make any
objection to your immaculate swain! I would have you understand,
however, that no part of my property shall go to enrich a parcel of
proud beggars. It was indeed my intention, if you had made a proper
match, to give you the little all that I have to bestow; but if you
prefer starving with your methodist parson to being the heiress of
five-and-forty thousand pounds, I have no more to say. However, you had
better keep your own secret. The knowledge of it might probably alter Mr
De Courcy's plans a little.'

'Your Ladyship,' answered Laura, with spirit, 'has good access to know
that the love of wealth has little influence on my purposes; and I
assure you that Mr De Courcy would scorn upon any terms to appropriate
what he considers as the unalienable right of your own child. Though we
shall not be affluent, we shall be too rich for your charity, and that
is the only claim in which I could compete with Mrs Herbert.'

This mention of her daughter exasperated Lady Pelham to fury. In a voice
half-choked with passion, she cried, 'Neither that rebellious wretch nor
any of her abbettors or imitators shall ever have countenance or
assistance from me. No! Not though they should beg with their starved
bantlings from door to door.' To this intemperate speech Laura made no
reply, but quietly began to pour out the tea. Lady Pelham continued to
hurry up and down the room, chafing, and venting her rage in common
abuse; for a scold in the drawing-room is not very unlike a scold at a
green-stall. The storm meeting with no opposition, at length spent
itself; or subsided into short growlings, uttered at the intervals of a
surly silence. To these, as no answer was absolutely necessary, none was
returned. Laura did not utter a syllable, till Lady Pelham's wrath
beginning to give place to her curiosity, she turned to her niece,
saying, 'Pray, Miss Montreville, when and where is this same wise
marriage of yours to take place?'

'The time is not quite fixed, Madam,' answered Laura. 'As soon as you
can conveniently spare me, I intend going to Scotland; and when you, and
Mrs De Courcy wish me to return, Mr De Courcy will escort me back.'

'I spare you!' returned Lady Pelham with a sneer--'Oh, Ma'am, if that is
all, pray don't let me retard your raptures. You may go tomorrow, or
to-night, Ma'am if you please.--Spare you indeed! Truly while I can
afford to pay a domestic, I need not be dependent on your assistance;
and in attachment or gratitude any common servant may supply your
place.'

The rudeness and ingratitude of this speech again forced the tears to
Laura's eyes; but she mildly replied, 'Well, Madam, as soon as you find
a substitute for me, I shall be ready to depart.' Then to escape
further insult she quitted the room.

Lady Pelham's wrath at the derangement of her plan would not suffer her
to rest till she had communicated the disaster to Colonel Hargrave.
Early next morning, accordingly, she dispatched a note requiring his
immediate presence at Walbourne. He obeyed the summons, and was as usual
privately received by Lady Pelham. He listened to her intelligence with
transports of rage rather than of sorrow. He loaded his rival with
execrations, declaring that he would rather see Laura torn in pieces
than know her to be the wife of De Courcy. He swore that he would
circumvent their schemes, and that though his life should be the
forfeit, he would severely revenge the sufferings he had endured.

Lady Pelham had not courage to encounter the evil spirit which she had
raised. Subdued, and crouching before his violence, she continued to
give a terrified assent to every extravagance he uttered, till he
announced his resolution of seeing Laura on the instant, that he might
know whether she dared to confirm this odious tale. Lady Pelham then
ventured to represent to him that Laura might be so much offended by
this breach of contract, as to take refuge with Mrs De Courcy, a measure
which would oppose a new obstacle to any scheme for breaking off the
intended marriage. She assured him that she would grant every reasonable
assistance in preventing a connection so injurious to her niece's
interest, though she knew Laura's obstinacy of temper too well to hope
any thing from direct resistance. She hinted that it would be most
prudent to give the desired interview the appearance of accident, and
she promised to contrive the occasion as soon as Hargrave was
sufficiently calm to consider of improving it to best advantage.

But calm was a stranger to the breast of Hargrave. The disquiet which is
the appointed portion of the wicked, raged there beyond control. To the
anguish of disappointment were added the pangs of jealousy, and the
heart-burnings of hatred and revenge. Even the loss of the object of
three years eager pursuit was less cutting than the success of De
Courcy; and the pain of a forfeiture which was the just punishment of a
former crime, was heightened to agony by the workings of such passions
as consummate the misery of fiends.

The associates of the wicked must forego the consolations of honest
sympathy. All Hargrave's tortures were aggravated by the sarcasms of
Lambert; who, willing to hasten the fever to its crisis, goaded him with
coarse comments upon the good fortune of his rival, and advices (which
he well knew would act in a direction opposite to their seeming purpose)
to desist from further competition. After spending four-and-twenty hours
in alternate fits of rage and despair, Hargrave returned to Lady Pelham,
informing her, that whatever were the consequences, he would no longer
delay seeing Laura. Lady Pelham had foreseen this demand; and though not
without fear of the event, had prepared for compliance. She had already
arranged her scheme, and the execution was easy.

Laura's favourite walk in the shrubbery led to a little summer-house,
concealed in a thicket of acacias. Thither Lady Pelham had conveyed some
dried plants, and had requested Laura's assistance in classing them.
Laura had readily agreed, and that very morning had been allotted for
the task. Lady Pelham, having first directed Hargrave where to take his
station, accompanied her unsuspecting niece to the summer-house, and
there for a while joined in her employment. Soon, however, feigning a
pretext for half an hour's absence, she quitted Laura, intending at
first to loiter in the shrubbery, as a kind of safeguard against the ill
consequences of her imprudent connivance; but meeting with a gardener
who was going to transplant a bed of favourite auriculas, she followed
him to watch over their safety, leaving her niece to guard her own.

Scarcely had Laura been a minute alone, ere she was startled by the
entrance of Hargrave, and seriously alarmed by seeing him lock the door,
and deliberately secure the key. 'What is it you mean, Sir?' said she,
trembling.

'To decide your fate and mine!' answered Hargrave, with a look and voice
that struck terror to her soul. 'I am told you are a bride, Laura,' said
he, speaking through his clenched teeth. 'Say,' continued he, firmly
grasping her arm. 'Speak! is it so?'

'I know no right,' said Laura, recovering herself, 'that you have to
question me--nor meanly thus to steal--'

'No evasions!' interrupted Hargrave, in a voice of thunder. 'I have
rights--rights which I will maintain while I have being. Now tell me, if
you dare, that you have transferred them to that abhorred--'

He stopped,--his utterance choked by the frenzy into which he had worked
himself. 'What has transported you to this fury, Colonel Hargrave?' said
Laura, calmly. 'Surely you must be sensible, that whatever claims I
might once have allowed you, have long since been made void by your own
conduct. I will not talk to you of principle, though that were of itself
sufficient to sever us forever; but ask yourself what right you can
retain over the woman whom you have insulted, and forsaken, and
oppressed, and outraged?'

'Spare your taunts, Laura. They will only embitter the hour of
retribution. And may hell be my portion, if I be not richly repaid for
all the scorn you have heaped upon me. I will be revenged, proud woman.
You shall be at my mercy, where no cool canting villain can wrest you
from me!'

His threats, and the frightful violence with which they were uttered,
filled Laura with mingled dread and pity. 'Command yourself, I beseech
you, Colonel Hargrave,' said she. 'If you resent the pain which, believe
me, I have most unwillingly occasioned, you are amply revenged. You have
already caused me sufferings which mock description.'

'Yes, yes. I know it,' cried Hargrave in a milder voice. 'You were not
then so hard. You could feel when that vile wanton first seduced me from
you. Then think what I now endure, when this cold-blooded--but may I
perish if I do not snatch his prize from him. And think not of
resistance, Laura; for, by all that I have suffered, resistance shall be
vain.'

'Why do you talk so dreadfully to me?' said Laura, making a trembling
effort to release her arm, which he still firmly grasped. 'Why, why will
you not cease to persecute me? I have never injured you. I have
forgiven, pitied, prayed for you. How have I deserved this worse than
savage cruelty?'

'Laura,' said Hargrave, moved by the pleadings of a voice which would
have touched a murderer's heart, 'you have still a choice. Promise to be
mine. Permit me only, by slow degrees, to regain what I have lost. Say
that months--that years hence you will consent, and you are safe.'

'Impossible!' said Laura. 'I cannot bind myself. Nor could you trust a
promise extorted by fear. Yet be but half what I once thought you, and I
will esteem--'

'Esteem!' interrupted Hargrave, with a ghastly smile. 'Yes! And shrink
from me, as you do now, while you hang on that detested wretch till even
his frozen heart warm to passion. No!' continued he, with an awful
adjuration, 'though the deed bring me to the scaffold, you shall be
mine. You shall be my wife, too, Laura,--but not till you have besought
me--sued at my feet for the title you have so often despised. I will be
master of your fate, of that reputation, that virtue which you
worship--and your minion shall know it, that he may writhe under
jealousy and disappointment.'

'Powers of Mercy!' cried Laura, raising her eyes in strong compunction,
'have I made this mine idol!' Then, turning on Hargrave a look of deep
repentance, 'Yes,' she continued, 'I deserve to see thee as thou art,
without mitigation vile; since on thee my sacrilegious heart bestowed
such love as was due to the Infinite alone!'

'Oh, Laura,' cried Hargrave, softened by the remembrance of her youthful
affection, 'let but one faint spark of that love revive, and I will
forget all your scorns, and feel again such gentle wishes as blest our
first hours of tenderness. Or only swear that you will renounce that
bane of my existence--that you will shrink from him, shun him like a
serpent!--Or give me your word only, and I will trust it. Your liberty,
your person, shall be as sacred as those of angels. Promise them--'

'Why do you attempt to terrify me?' said Laura, her indignation rising
as her alarm subsided. 'I have perhaps no longer the right--even if I
had the inclination--to utter such a vow. I trust that, in this land of
freedom, I am safe from your violence. My reputation, frail as it is,
you cannot harm without permission from on high; and if, for wise
purposes, the permission be given, I doubt not that I shall be enabled
to bear unjust reproach,--nay, even to profit by the wrong.'

Hargrave suffered her to conclude; rage bereft him, for a time, of the
power of utterance. Then, bursting into a torrent of reproach, he
upbraided her in language the most insulting. 'Do you dare to own,' said
he, 'that your base inclinations favour that abhorred--that this
accursed marriage is your choice--your free choice?' He paused in vain
for a reply. Laura would not irritate him further, and scorned to
disguise the truth. 'Then, Laura,' said he, and he confirmed the
sentence with a dreadful oath, 'you have sealed your fate. Think you
that your De Courcy shall foil me? By Heaven, I will see you perish
first. I will tear you from him, though I answer it with my life and
soul. Let this be the pledge of my triumph'--and he made a motion to
clasp her rudely in his arms. With a cry of dread and horror, Laura
sprung from him, and, throwing open the casement, called loudly for
assistance. Hargrave forced her back. 'Spare your alarms, my lovely
proud one,' said he, with a smile, which made her blood run cold. 'You
are safe till we meet where cries will be useless. What! may I not even
kiss this pretty hand, as earnest that you shall soon be mine beyond the
power of fate?' 'Silence, audacious!' cried Laura, bursting into tears
of mingled fear and indignation, while she struggled violently to
disengage her hands. 'Nay, this rosy cheek will content me better,'
cried Hargrave, and was again attempting to clasp her--when the door was
burst suddenly open, and De Courcy appeared.

'Ruffian!' he exclaimed, approaching Hargrave, who, in his surprise,
permitted his prey to escape. Her fears now taking a new direction,
Laura flew to intercept De Courcy. 'Ah!' she cried, 'my folly has done
this. Fly from this madman, I entreat you. I have nothing to fear but
for you. Begone, I implore you.'

'And leave you to such treatment! Not while I have life! When you choose
to go, I will attend you. For you, Sir!--But I must stoop below the
language of a gentleman ere I find words to describe your conduct.'

'For Heaven's sake,' cried Laura, 'dear De Courcy, provoke him no
further. Let us fly this place;' and clinging to De Courcy's arm, she
drew him on; while, with the other, he defended her from Hargrave, who
had advanced to detain her. Her expression of regard, her confiding
attitude, exasperated the frenzy of Hargrave to the uttermost. Almost
unconscious of his actions, he drew a pistol from his pocket and fired.
Laura uttered a cry of terror, clasping her lover's arm more closely to
her breast. 'Be not alarmed love,' whispered De Courcy. 'It is
nothing!'--and staggering forward a few paces, he fell to the ground.

Laura, in desperation rushed from the summer-house, calling wildly for
help; then struck with the fearful thought that Hargrave might complete
his bloody work, she hastened back. During the few moments of her
absence, De Courcy addressed his murderer, whose rage had given place to
a mild stupor. 'I fear this is an unlucky stroke, Hargrave. Save
yourself. My horse is at the gate.' Hargrave answered only with a groan;
and, striking his clenched hand on his forehead, turned away. His crime
was unpremeditated. No train of self-deceit had reconciled his
conscience to its atrocity. The remembrance of the courage which had
saved his life; the generous concern of De Courcy for his safety;
humility, the last virtue which utterly forsakes us, all awakened him to
remorse, keen and overwhelming, like every other passion of Hargrave.
Not bearing to look upon his victim, he stood fixed and motionless;
while Laura, on her knees, watched, in dismay, the changing countenance
of De Courcy, and strove to staunch the blood which was streaming from
his wound.

De Courcy once more tried to cheer Laura with words of comfort. 'Were
it not,' said he, 'for the pleasure this kind concern gives me, I might
tell you that I do not suffer much pain. I am sure I could rise, if I
could trust this slender arm,' laying his hand gently upon it. Laura
eagerly offered her assistance as he attempted to raise himself; but the
effort overpowered him, and he sunk back fainting.

In the strong language of terror, Laura besought Hargrave to procure
help. Still motionless, his forehead resting against the wall, his hands
clenched as in convulsion, Hargrave seemed not to heed her entreaties.
'Have you no mercy?' cried she, clasping the arm from which she had so
lately shrunk in horror. 'He saved your life. Will you let him perish
without aid?' 'Off, woman!' cried Hargrave, throwing her from him. 'Thy
witchcraft has undone me;' and he distractedly hurried away.

Laura's terror was not the passive cowardice of a feeble mind. She was
left alone to judge, to act, for herself--for more than herself.
Immediate, momentous decision was necessary. And she did decide by an
effort of which no mind enfeebled by sloth or selfishness would have
been capable. She saw that loss of blood was the cause of De Courcy's
immediate danger, a danger which might be irremediable before he could
receive assistance from more skilful hands than her's. Such remedy,
then, as she could command she hastened to apply.

To the plants which their beauty had recommended to Lady Pelham, Laura
had added a few of which the usefulness was known to her. Agaric of the
oak was of the number, and she had often applied it where many a hand
less fair would have shrunk from the task. Nor did she hesitate now. The
ball had entered near the neck; and the feminine, the delicate Laura
herself disengaged the wound from its coverings; the feeling, the tender
Laura herself performed an office from which false sensibility would
have recoiled in horror.

She was thus employed when she was found by a woman whom Hargrave had
met and sent to her assistance, with an indistinct message, from which
Laura gathered that he was gone in search of a surgeon. The woman no
sooner cast her eyes on the bloody form of De Courcy, and on the
colourless face of Laura, more death-like than his, than, with noisy
imbecility, she began to bewail and ejaculate. Laura, however, instantly
put a stop to her exclamations by dispatching her for cordials and
assistance. In a few minutes all the household was assembled round De
Courcy; yet such was the general curiosity, horror, or astonishment,
that he would have remained unaided but for the firmness of her who was
most interested in the scene. She dismissed every one whose presence
was unnecessary, and silenced the rest by peremptory command. She
administered a cordial to recruit the failing strength of De Courcy; and
causing him to be raised to the posture which seemed the least painful,
made her own trembling arms his support.

Nothing further now remained to be done, and Laura began to feel the
full horrors of her situation; to weigh the fearful probability that all
her cares were vain; to upbraid herself as the cause of this dire
tragedy. Her anguish was too great to find relief in tears. Pale and
cold as marble, chilly drops bursting from her forehead, she sat in the
stillness of him who waits the sentence of condemnation, save when a
convulsive shudder expressed her suffering.

The mournful quiet was interrupted by the entrance of Lady Pelham, who,
quite out of breath, began a string of questions, mixed with abundance
of ejaculation. 'Bless my soul!' she cried, 'how has all this happened?
For heaven's sake, Laura, tell me the meaning of all this. Why don't you
speak, girl? Good Lord! could you not have prevented these madmen from
quarrelling? What brought De Courcy here? How did he find you out? Why
don't you speak. Mercy on me! Is the girl out of her senses?'

The expression of deep distress with which Laura now raised her eyes,
reminded Lady Pelham of the sensibility requisite upon such an occasion,
which her Ladyship's curiosity had hitherto driven from her
recollection. Approaching, therefore, to De Courcy, she took a hasty
look at this dismal spectacle; and exclaiming, 'Oh what a sight is here!
Unfortunate Laura! Dear wretched girl!' she began first to sob, and then
to scream violently. Laura motioned to the attendants to lead her away;
and she suffered them to do so without resistance; but she had no sooner
crossed the threshold, than, perceiving the spectators whom curiosity
had collected in the shrubbery, she redoubled her shrieks, struggled,
beat herself; and, but for the untoward strength of her nerves, would
have soon converted her pretended fit into reality. Wearied with her
efforts, she was beginning to relax them, when the surgeon appeared, and
her Ladyship was more vociferous than ever. Mr Raby, a quiet sensible
man, undertook her care before he proceeded to his more serious
business; and, either guided by his previous acquaintance with his
patient, or by his experience in similar cases, gave a prescription
which, though simple was perfectly efficacious. He directed that the
lady should be instantly secluded in her own chamber, with only one
attendant; and the remedy proved so beneficial, that her Ladyship
enjoyed a night of tranquil repose.

He next turned his attention to De Courcy; and judging it proper to
extract the ball without delay, advised Laura to retire. Without
opposition she prepared to obey; and, seeing De Courcy about to speak,
put her hand on his lips to save him the exertion, and herself the pain
of a farewell. Yet, as she resigned her charge, raising her eyes to
heaven, once more to commend De Courcy to the divine protection, the
fervour of her supplication burst into words. 'Oh if it be possible! if
it be possible!'--she cried. 'Yes it is possible,' said De Courcy,
comprehending the unfinished sentence. 'Your firmness, noble creature,
has made it possible.' Reproaching herself with having allowed De Courcy
to perceive her alarm, she hastened away; and seating herself on the
steps that led to the door, awaited in silence the event of the
operation.

Here, as she sorrowfully called to mind the various excellencies of De
Courcy, his piety, his integrity, his domestic virtues, so lately known,
so soon to be lost to her, she suddenly recollected the heavier calamity
of the mother deprived of such a son, and perceived the inhumanity of
permitting the stroke to fall without preparation. Having access to no
messenger more tender than a common servant, she determined, though with
unspeakable reluctance, herself to bear the tidings to Mrs De Courcy. 'I
will know the worst,' thought she, 'and then'--

She started at a faint noise that sounded from the summer-house. Steps
approached the door from within. She sprung up, and the surgeon
appeared. 'I have the happiness to tell you,' said he, 'that, if no
fever take place, our friend is safe. The chief danger has been from
loss of blood; and your presence of mind--Ah!--Do you feel faint?'--

The awful interest which had supported the spirits of Laura thus
suddenly withdrawn, the tide of various feeling overpowered them; and
she sunk into one of those long and deep faintings which were now
unhappily become in some degree constitutional with her. Mr Raby having
given directions for her recovery, placed De Courcy in Lady Pelham's
carriage, and himself attended him to Norwood; where he mitigated Mrs De
Courcy's horror and distress by assuring her of her son's safety, which
he again delighted Montague by ascribing to the cares of Laura.

It was late in the evening before Laura was sufficiently collected to
review with composure the events of the day! As soon, however, as she
was capable of considering all the circumstances, a suspicion occurred
that her unfortunate interview with Hargrave had been sanctioned, if not
contrived by Lady Pelham. That he should know the place and the hour in
which he might surprise her alone;--that to this place, which because of
its loneliness she had of late rather deserted, she should be conducted
by her aunt;--that at this moment she should upon a trivial pretence be
left in solitude,--seemed a coincidence too strong to be merely
accidental. She recollected some symptoms of private communication
between Lady Pelham and Hargrave. Suspicions of connivance in the
infamous strategem of her arrest again revived in her mind. Lady Pelham,
she perceived, had afforded her a protection at best imperfect, perhaps
treacherous. Hargrave's late threats too, as she revolved them in her
thoughts, appeared more like the intimations of settled design than the
vague ravings of passion. Prudence, therefore, seemed to require that
she should immediately provide for her own safety: and indignation at
her aunt's breach of confidence, hastened the purpose which she formed,
to leave Walbourne without delay. She determined to go the next morning
to Norwood, there to remain till De Courcy shewed signs of
convalescence, and then perform her long-projected journey to Scotland.

In order to avoid unpleasant altercation, she resolved to depart without
warning Lady Pelham of her intention; merely announcing by letter the
reasons of her conduct. The affectionate Laura would not have parted
from the meanest servant without a kindly farewell; but her innate
abhorrence of treachery steeled her heart, and she rejoiced that it was
possible to escape all present intercourse with her deceitful kinswoman.

As soon as the dawn appeared she arose; and on her knees thankfully
acknowledged the protecting care which had watched over her, since first
as a destitute orphan she applied to Lady Pelham. She blessed the
goodness which had softened in her favour a heart little subject to
benevolent expressions, which had restored her in sickness, consoled her
in sorrow, delivered her from the snares of the wicked, and opened to
her the joys of virtuous friendship. And where is the wretch so
miserable that he may not in the review of eighteen months find subjects
of gratitude still more numerous! Laura began no important action of her
life without imploring a blessing on the event; and she now proceeded to
commend herself and her future prospects to the same care of which she
had glad experience.

The proper business of the morning ended, she had begun to make
arrangements for her immediate departure; when she heard Lady Pelham's
bell ring, and the next instant heard a noise like that occasioned by
the fall of something heavy. She listened for a while, but all was again
still. The rest of the family were yet buried in sleep, and Laura
hearing no one stirring to answer Lady Pelham's summons, began to fear
that her aunt was ill, perhaps unable to make any further effort to
procure assistance. At this idea, all her just indignation subsiding in
a moment, she flew to Lady Pelham's chamber.

Lady Pelham was lying on the floor, having apparently fallen in an
attempt to rise from her bed. She was alive though insensible; and her
face, though altered, was still florid. Laura soon procuring help,
raised her from the ground; and guessing that apoplexy was her disorder,
placed her in an upright posture, loosened her night-clothes, and having
hurried away a servant for Mr Raby, ventured, until his arrival, upon
such simple remedies as she knew might be safely administered. In little
more than an hour the surgeon arrived; and having examined his patient,
declared her to be in extreme danger. Before he left her, however, he
succeeded in restoring her to some degree of recollection; yet, far from
changing his first opinion, he advised Laura to lose no time in making
every necessary use of an amendment which he feared would be only
transient.

From Lady Pelham, he went to Norwood; and returning to Walbourne in the
evening, brought the pleasing intelligence that De Courcy continued to
do well. This second visit produced no change in his sentiments, and he
remained persuaded that though Lady Pelham might continue to linger for
a time, the shock had been too great to allow of complete recovery.
Laura now rejoiced that she had not executed her purpose of leaving
Walbourne; since, had her aunt's illness succeeded to the rage which her
departure would have excited, she could never have ceased to blame
herself as the cause. She looked with profound compassion, too, upon the
condition of an unfortunate being, whose death-bed was neither smoothed
by affection, nor cheered by pious hope. 'Unhappy woman!' thought she,
as she sat watching an unquiet slumber into which her aunt had fallen,
'to whom the best gifts of nature and of fortune have, by some fatality,
been useless, or worse than useless; whose affluence has purchased no
higher joys than half-grudged luxuries; whose abilities have dazzled
others and bewildered herself, but lent no steady light to guide her
way; whose generosity has called forth no gratitude, whose kindness has
awakened no affection; to whom length of days has brought no reverence,
and length of intimacy no friends! Even the sacred ties of nature have
been to her unblessed. Her only child, driven from her in anger, dares
not approach to share the last sad offices with me, who, in performing
them, must forgive as well as pity. Favourite of fortune! what has been
wanting to thee save that blessing which "bringeth no sorrow with it."
But that blessing was light in thine esteem; and amidst the glitter of
thy toys, the "pearl of great price" was disregarded.'

For some days Lady Pelham continued much in the same situation. She
suffered no pain, yet gave no signs of amendment. On the sixth morning
from her first attack she grew suddenly and materially worse. It was
soon discovered that her limbs were paralyzed, and the surgeon declared
that her end could not be very distant. Her senses, however, again
returned, and she continued free from pain. She shewed little
apprehension of her own danger; and Laura debated with herself whether
she should permit her aunt to dream away the last precious hours of
probation, or endeavour to awaken her to a sense of her condition.

Laura had no faith in death-bed repentance. She knew that resolution of
amendment which there is no longer time to practise, and renunciation of
sin made under the immediate prospect of punishment, are at best
suspicious. She knew that, in the ordinary course of providence, the
grace which has been long despised is at length justly withdrawn. Yet
she saw that she had no right to judge Lady Pelham as wholly impenitent;
and she considered a death-bed as highly suitable to the renewal, though
not to the beginning of repentance. She knew too, that the call _might_
be made effectual at the 'eleventh hour;' and the bare chance was worth
the toil of ages. She felt how little she herself would have valued the
mistaken pity which could suffer her to enter on the 'dark valley'
without a warning to cling closer to the 'staff and rod' of
comfort:--She therefore ventured to hint gently to Lady Pelham the
opinion of her medical friends, and to remind her of the duty of
preparing for the worst.

Lady Pelham at first appeared a good deal shocked; and lay for some time
apparently meditating upon her situation. At last, recovering her
spirits, she said, 'Your nerves, Laura, were always so coarse, that you
seemed to me to take a pleasure in thinking of shocking things; but I
am sure it is abominably barbarous in you to tease me with them now I am
ill. Do keep your horrid fancies to yourself, or keep away till you are
cured of the vapours--I dare say it is your dismal face that makes me
dream so unpleasantly.'

Laura, however, was not to be so discouraged. She took occasion to
represent that no harm could ensue from preparing to meet the foe; since
his march was not to be retarded by shutting our eyes on his advances,
nor hastened by the daring which watched his approach. She at length
thought she had succeeded in convincing her aunt of her danger. Lady
Pelham _said_ that she feared she was dying, and she believed that she
said the truth. But Lady Pelham had had sixty years practice in
self-deceit. The fear might flutter in her imagination, but was not
strong enough to touch her heart. Laura, however, made use of her
acknowledgement to press upon her the duties of forgiveness and charity
towards all mindkind, and especially towards her child; reminding her of
the affecting parity of situation between offending man and his
disobedient offspring. Lady Pelham at first answered impatiently that
she would not be argued on this subject; but as her spirits began to
fail under the first confinement which she had ever endured, she became
more tractable. 'God knows,' said she to Laura, one day, 'we all have
much need to be forgiven; and therefore we must forgive in our turn. For
my part I am sure I die in charity with all mankind, and with that
creature among the rest. However, I shall take my friend the Spectator's
advice, and remember the difference between giving and _for_giving.'

Laura often begged permission to send for Mrs Herbert; but Lady Pelham
sometimes postponed it till she should get better, sometimes till she
should grow worse. Laura was in the meantime her constant attendant;
bearing with her peevishness, soothing her caprice, and striving to
rouse in her feelings suitable to her condition. Finding, however, that
she made but little progress in her pious work, she begged that she
might be allowed to take the assistance of a clergyman. 'A clergyman,
child!' cried Lady Pelham. 'Do you imagine me to be a papist? Or do you
think me capable of such weak superstitution as to place more reliance
on a parson's prayers than on yours, or my maid Betty's? No, no! I trust
I have been no worse than other people; and I hope, though I may be
weak, I shall never be fanatical. Besides, I have too high a sense of
the Divine Justice to think that our Maker would first give us
ungovernable passions, and then punish us for yielding to them. A
phlegmatic being like you, may indeed be called to strict account; but
people of strong feelings must be judged by a different standard.' 'Oh,
Madam,' said Laura, 'be assured that our Maker gives us no unconquerable
passions. If we ourselves have made them so, it becomes us to be humbled
in the dust, not to glory in the presumptuous hope that He will soften
the sanctions of his law to favour our remissness.'

Driven from the strong hold of justice, rather by the increase of her
bodily languor, than by the force of truth, the dying sinner had
recourse to mercy,--a mercy, however, of her own composing. 'It is
true,' said she one day to Laura, 'that I have done some things which I
have reason to regret, and which, I must confess, deserve punishment.
But Divine Mercy towards believers, we are told, is infinite; and though
I may at times have doubted, I have never disbelieved.' Laura,
shuddering at this awful blindness, was striving to frame a useful
reply, when she saw her aunt's countenance change. It was distorted by a
momentary convulsion, and then fixed for ever in the stillness of
death.




CHAPTER XXXII


Laura was more shocked than afflicted by the death of a person whom she
was unable to love, and had no reason to respect. She lost no time in
conveying the news to Mrs Herbert, begging that she would herself come
and give the necessary directions. Thinking it proper to remain at
Walbourne till after her aunt's funeral, she refused Mrs De Courcy's
invitation to spend at Norwood the time which intervened. De Courcy
continued to recover fast; and Laura, thinking she might soon leave him
without anxiety, again fixed an early day for her journey to Scotland.

Notwithstanding Laura's knowledge of the phlegmatic temperament of her
cousin, she was surprised at the stoicism with which Mrs Herbert
supported the death of her mother. She examined the dead body with a
cold comment on its appearance; gave orders for the interment in an
unfaltering voice; and neither seemed to feel nor to affect the
slightest concern. Nor did her philosophy appear to fail her one jot,
when, upon opening the will, she was found to be left without
inheritance. The paper, which had been drawn up a few months before,
evinced Lady Pelham's adherence to her scheme for her niece's
advancement; and this, with her obstinate enmity to Mrs Herbert,
furnished the only instance of her consistency or perseverance, which
were ever known to the world. Her whole property she bequeathed to Laura
Montreville, and to her second son upon taking the name of Pelham,
provided that Laura married Colonel Hargrave, or a peer, or the eldest
son of a peer; but if she married a commoner, or remained unmarried, she
was to inherit only ten thousand pounds, the bulk of the property going
to a distant relation.

The very hour that this will was made public, Laura informed the
contingent heir that he might possess himself of his inheritance, since
she would certainly never perform the conditions which alone could
destroy his claim. Not acquiescing in the justice of excluding Mrs
Herbert from her natural rights she would instantly have offered to
share with her cousin the bequest of Lady Pelham; but considering that
her engagement with De Courcy entitled him to decide on the disposal of
whatever belonged to his future wife, she hastened to ask his sanction
to her purpose. De Courcy, without hesitation, advised that the whole
should be given up to its natural owner. 'We shall have enough for
humble comfort, dear Laura,' said he, 'and have no need to grasp at a
doubtful claim.' Laura, however, differed from him in opinion. She
thought she might, in strict justice, retain part of the bequest of so
near a relation; and she felt pleased to think that she should enter the
De Courcy family not altogether portionless. She therefore reserved two
thousand pounds, giving up the rest unconditionally to Mrs Herbert.

These points being settled, nothing now remained to retard Laura's
journey to Scotland. Mrs De Courcy, indeed, urged her to postpone it
till Montague should acquire a right to be her escort; but Laura
objected that it was her wish to give a longer time to her old friend
than she thought it proper to withdraw De Courcy from his business and
his home. She reflected, too, with a light heart, that a protector in
her journey was now less necessary, since her mad lover, as Harriet
called Colonel Hargrave, had embarked for America. Laura had heard of
his departure before her aunt's death; and she gladly observed that
favourable winds were speeding him across the Atlantic.

The day preceding that on which she meant to leave Walbourne, she spent
with Mrs De Courcy and Montague; who, though not entirely recovered, was
able to resume his station in the family-room. De Courcy, with the
enthusiasm of youth and love, spoke of his happy prospects; his mother,
with the sober eye of experience, looked forward to joys as substantial,
though less dazzling; while feminine modesty suppressed the pleasure
with which Laura felt that she was necessary to these schemes of bliss.
With the confidence of mutual esteem they arranged their plan of
life,--a plan at once embracing usefulness and leisure, retirement and
hospitality. Laura consented that one month, 'one little month,' should
begin the accomplishment of these golden dreams; for she permitted De
Courcy to follow her at the end of that time to Scotland. A few weeks
they were to spend in wandering through the romantic scenes of her
native land; and then join Mrs De Courcy at Norwood, which was to
continue her permanent abode.

Laura remained with her friends till the evening was closing; then,
avoiding the solemnity of a farewell by a half-promise of stopping as
she passed the next day, she sprung into Mrs De Courcy's carriage, and
drove off. Tears rushed to De Courcy's eyes as the carriage was lost to
his sight. 'I am still weak,' thought he as he dashed them away. 'She
will soon return to bring gladness to every heart, and double joy to
mine. To-morrow too I shall see her,' thought he; yet he continued
depressed, and soon retired to his chamber.

Mrs De Courcy and her son met early the next morning, expecting that
Laura would early begin her journey. Montague stationed himself at the
window to watch for her appearance; half fearing that she would not keep
her promise, yet every minute repeating that it was impossible she could
go without bidding farewell. The breakfast hour arrived, and still Laura
came not. De Courcy, impatient, forgot his weakness, and insisted upon
walking to the gate that he might inquire whether a carriage had passed
from Walbourne.

He had scarcely left the house when old John, with a face that boded
evil, hastily came to beg that his Lady would speak with a servant of
Lady Pelham's. Mrs De Courcy, somewhat alarmed, desired that the servant
might come in. 'Please, Madam,' said he, 'let me know where I may find
Miss Montreville. The carriage has waited for her these three hours?'
'Good heavens!' cried Mrs De Courcy, in consternation. 'Is Miss
Montreville not at Walbourne?' 'No, Madam, she has not been there since
yesterday morning.' Mrs De Courcy, now in extreme alarm, summoned her
coachman, and desired to know where he had left Miss Montreville the
evening before. He answered, that, at Laura's desire, he had set her
down at the gate of Walbourne; that he had seen her enter; and
afterwards, in turning the carriage, had observed her walking along the
avenue towards the house. Inexpressibly shocked, Mrs De Courcy had yet
the presence of mind to forbid alarming her son with these fearful
tidings. As soon as she could recollect herself, she dispatched old
Wilson, on whose discretion she thought she might rely, to inform De
Courcy that a message from Walbourne had made her cease to expect
Laura's visit. Montague returned home, sad and disappointed. His
melancholy questions and comments increased the distress of his mother.
'Did she not even write one line?' said he. 'Could you have believed
that she would go without one farewell--that she could have passed our
very gate?' 'She was willing to spare you the pain of a farewell,' said
Mrs De Courcy, checking the anguish of her heart. 'She will write soon,
I hope.'

But day after day passed, and Laura did not write. Mrs De Courcy, still
concealing from her son a misfortune which she thought him yet unequal
to bear, used every possible exertion to trace the fugitive. She offered
high rewards to whoever could afford the smallest clue to discovery. She
advertised in every newspaper except that which De Courcy was accustomed
to read. Her suspicions at first falling upon Hargrave, she caused
particular inquiry to be made whether any of his domestics had been left
in England with orders to follow him; but she found that he with his
whole suite had sailed from Europe more than a fortnight before Laura's
disappearance. She employed emissaries to prosecute the search in almost
every part of the kingdom. Judging the metropolis to be the most likely
place of concealment, she made application to the officers of police for
assistance in her inquiries there. All was in vain. No trace of Laura
was to be found.

For a while De Courcy amused himself from day to day with the hope of
hearing from her; a hope which his mother had not the courage to
destroy. He calculated that she would reach the end of her journey on
the sixth day after that on which she left him. On the seventh she would
certainly write; therefore in four or five more he should undoubtedly
hear from her. The expected day came and passed as others had done,
without bringing news of Laura. Another and another came, and ended only
in disappointment. De Courcy was miserable. He knew not how to account
for a silence so adverse to the considerate kindness of Laura's
character, except by supposing that illness made her unable to write.
This idea gathering strength in his mind, he resolved to follow her
immediately to Scotland, tracing her through the route which he knew she
intended to take. Mrs De Courcy in vain attempted to dissuade him from
the prosecution of his design, and to sooth him with hopes which she
knew too well would prove deceitful. He was resolute, and Mrs De Courcy
was at last obliged to prevent his fruitless journey by unfolding the
truth. The utmost tenderness of caution was insufficient to prevent the
effects of this blow on De Courcy's bodily frame. In a few hours strong
fever seized him; and his wound, which had hitherto worn a favourable
appearance, gave alarming symptoms of inflammation. Three weeks did Mrs
De Courcy watch by his bedside in all the anguish of a mother's fears;
forgetting, in her anxiety for his life, that he must for a time live
only to sorrow. The balance long hung doubtful. At length the strength
of his constitution and his early habits of temperance prevailed. By
slow degrees his health was restored, though his spirits were still
oppressed by a dejection which long withstood every effort of reason and
religion.

To divert his sorrow rather than in the hope of removing its cause, he
left his home and wandered through the most unfrequented parts of
England, making anxious, yet almost hopeless, inquiries for his lost
treasure. Sometimes, misled by false intelligence, he was hurried from
place to place in all the eagerness of expectation, but bitter
disappointment closed the pursuit; and the companion of his relaxation,
his encouragement in study, his pattern in virtue, the friend, the
mistress, almost the wife, was lost beyond recal.

       *       *       *       *       *

While De Courcy was thus languishing on a sick-bed or wandering restless
and miserable, Laura too was a wanderer, a prey to care more deep, more
hopeless.

The soft shades of twilight were stealing on as she cast a last look
back towards Norwood; and were deepening fast as with a sigh,
half-pleasing, half-melancholy, she surveyed the sheltering chestnut
tree where she had once parted from De Courcy. As she approached her
home, the stars coming forth poured their silent language into the ear
of piety. Never deaf to this holy call, Laura dismissed her attendants
that she might meditate alone. She proceeded slowly along till she came
to the entrance of a woody lane, which branched off from the avenue. She
stopped, half-inclined to enter; a sensation of fear made her pause. The
next moment the very consciousness of that sensation induced her to
proceed. 'This is mere childish superstition,' said she, and entered the
lane. She had taken only a few steps when she felt herself suddenly
seized from behind; one person forcibly confining her arms while another
prevented her cries. Vainly struggling against masculine strength, she
was hurried rapidly forward, till, her breath failing, she could resist
no farther. Her conductors, soon quitting the beaten path, dragged her
on through a little wood that sheltered the lawn towards the east; till
reaching a gap which appeared to have been purposely made in the park
wall, Laura perceived a carriage in waiting. Again exerting the strength
of desperation, she struggled wildly for freedom; but the unequal
contest soon was closed; she was lifted into the carriage; one of the
men took his place by her side, and they drove off with the speed of
lightning.

From the moment when she recovered recollection, Laura had not a doubt
that she owed this outrage to Hargrave. She was convinced that his
pretence of leaving the kingdom had been merely intended to throw her
off her guard, and that he was now waiting, at no distant place, the
success of his daring villany. At this idea, a horrible dread seized
her, she threw herself back in the carriage, and wept in despair. Her
attendant perceiving that she no longer struggled, with a coarse
expression of pity, released her from his grasp; and taking the
handkerchief from her mouth, told her 'she might cry as long as she
pleased, for he knew it did a woman's heart good to cry.' Laura now
besought him to tell her whither she was going. 'You'll know that by and
by,' said he. 'Let me alone. I am going to sleep; do you the same.'

The bare mention of his purpose revived Laura's hopes. 'Surely,' thought
she, 'while he sleeps, I may escape. In spite of this fearful speed I
may spring out; and if I could but gain a few steps, in this darkness I
should be safe.' Full of this project, she remained still as the dead;
fearing by the slightest sound or motion to retard the sleep of her
guard. At last his breathing announced that he was asleep; and Laura
began, with trembling hands, to attempt her escape. The blinds were
drawn up; and if she could let down that on the side of the carriage
where she sat, she might without difficulty open the door. She tried to
stir the blind. It refused to yield. She used her utmost force, but it
remained firm. She ventured, cautious and trembling, to attempt that on
the other side. It dropt; and Laura thought she was free. It only
remained to open the door of the chaise and leap out. She tried it; but
the door was immoveable, and, in despair, she shrunk back. Again she
started up; for it occurred to her that, though with more danger, she
might escape by the window. Cautiously stepping across her guard, she
leant out and placed her hands on the top of the carriage, that,
trusting to her arms for supporting her weight, she might extricate
herself, and drop from thence into the road. Raising herself upon the
edge of the step, she fixed her hands more firmly. She paused a moment
to listen whether her guard were undisturbed. He still slept soundly;
and resting her limbs upon the window frame, she prepared to complete
her escape.

A moment more and she had been free; when a horseman riding up, pushed
her fiercely back, upbraiding, with tremendous oaths, the carelessness
of his companion. The fellow, rousing himself, retorted upon the
wretched Laura the abuse of his comrade, swearing that 'since he saw she
was so cunning, he would keep better watch on her for the future.'

The desponding Laura endured his reproaches in silence. Finding herself
thus doubly guarded, she resigned all hope of escaping by her own
unaided exertions; and mingling silent prayers with her fearful
anticipations, she strove to reanimate her trust that she should not be
wholly forsaken. Sometimes her habitual confidence prevailed, and she
felt assured, that she should not be left a prey to the wicked. Yet the
dreadful threats, the fiery passions of Hargrave rose to her
recollection, and she again shuddered in despair. She suddenly
remembered Jessy Wilson. Starting, with an exclamation of horror and
affright, she sought some weapon which might dispense to her a death
less terrible; and instinctively grasping her pen-knife hid it in her
bosom. The next moment she shrunk from her purpose, and doubted the
lawfulness of such defence. 'Will he dare his own life, too?' thought
she. 'Oh, Heaven! in mercy spare me the necessity of sending a wretch to
his great account, with all his crimes unrepented on his head--or pardon
him and me?'

She continued to commend herself to Heaven, till her terrors by degrees
subsided. She began again to feel the steady trust which is acquired by
all who are habituated to a grateful consideration of the care which
they experience; a trust that even the most adverse events shall
terminate in their real advantage; that the rugged and slippery ways of
this dark wilderness, shall, at the dawn of everlasting day, be owned as
the fittest to conduct us to the house of our Father. She began, too, to
regain the confidence which strong minds naturally put in their own
exertions. She resolved not to be wanting to herself; nor, by brooding
over her terrors, to disable herself from taking advantage of any
providential circumstance which might favour her escape.

Morning at length began to dawn, but the blinds being closely drawn up,
Laura could make no observations on the country through which she was
passing. She remarked that the furious speed with which she had first
been driven, had slackened to a slow pace; and she judged that the
wearied cattle could not proceed much further. She hoped that it would
soon be necessary to stop; and that during the few minutes in which they
halted to change horses, she might find means of appealing to the
justice of her fellow-creatures. 'Surely,' said she, 'some heart will be
open to me.'

After proceeding slowly for some time the carriage stopped. Laura
listened for the sounds of human voices, but all was silent. She heard
the trampling of horses as if led close by the carriage. Some one was
certainly near who had no interest in this base oppression. 'Help! Oh
help me,' cried Laura. 'I am cruelly and wrongfully detained. I have
friends that will reward you. Heaven will reward you!--Help me! for kind
mercy, help me!' 'Heyday!' cried the fellow in the carriage, with
something between a grin and a stare, 'who is the girl speaking to?
What! did you imagine we should be wise enough to bring you within holla
of a whole yardful of stable boys and piping chambermaids? Reward
indeed! Set your heart at rest, Miss; we shall be rewarded without your
friends or Heaven either.'

The carriage again proceeded with the same speed as at first, and Laura
strove to support with composure this new blow to her hopes. Her
companion, now producing a bottle of wine and some biscuits, advised her
to share with him; and that she might not wilfully lavish her strength
and spirits, she consented. Once more in the course of the day the
travellers stopped to change horses, and Laura once more, though with
feebler hopes, renewed her appeals to justice and mercy. No answer
greeted her. Again she was hurried on her melancholy way.

The day, as it advanced, seemed rough and gloomy. The wind swept in
gusts through the trees, and the rain beat upon the carriage. The
evening was drawing on when Laura remarked that the motion was changed.
The chaise proceeded slowly over soft uneven ground, and she guessed,
with dismay, that it had quitted all frequented paths. In renewed alarm,
she again besought her companion to tell her whither he meant to conduct
her, and for what end she was thus cruelly forced from her home. 'Why,
how should I tell you what I do not know myself?' answered the man. 'I
shan't conduct you much farther--and a good riddance. As for the end
you'll see that when it comes.'

About an hour after quitting the road, the carriage stopped; and the man
letting down the blind, Laura perceived through the dusk, that they were
on a barren moor. Waste and level, it seemed to spread before her; but
the darkness prevented her from distinguishing its features or its
boundaries. Suddenly, as the gust died away, she fancied she heard the
roar of waters. She listened; but the wind swelled again, and she heard
only its howlings over the heath. The horseman, who had rode away when
the carriage stopped, now gallopped back, and directed the postilion to
proceed. They went on for a few hundred yards, and again they stopped.
The roar of waters again burst on Laura's ear, now swelling in thunder,
now sinking in a sullen murmur. She saw a light glimmer at a distance.
It was tossed by the billows of the ocean.

The door of the chaise was opened, and she was lifted from it. Gliding
from the arms of the ruffian who held her, and clasping his knees, 'Oh!
if you have the heart of a man,' she cried, 'let me not be torn from my
native land--let me not be cast on the merciless deep. Think what it is
to be an exile--friendless in a strange land--the sport, the prey of a
pitiless enemy. Oh! if you have need of mercy, have mercy upon
me.'--'Holla! Robert,' shouted the ruffian, 'take away this girl. She's
enough to make a man play the fool and whimper.' The other fellow now
approaching, lifted Laura, more dead than alive, from the ground, and,
wrapping her in a large cloak, bore her towards the beach.

In a creek sheltered by rocks from the breakers, lay a small boat. One
man sat near the bow, roaring a hoarse sea-song. As the party
approached, he rose, and pushing the boat ashore, received the half
lifeless Laura in his brawny arms, cursing her with strange oaths for
having made him wait so long. Then, on his uttering a discordant yell,
two of his companions appeared; and after exchanging with Laura's guards
a murmuring account of the trouble they had undergone, pushed off from
the land. The keel grated along the pebbles; the next moment it floated
on the waves, and Laura starting up, threw back the cloak from her face,
and with strained eyes gazed on her parting native land, till all behind
was darkness.

A pang of anguish striking to her heart, she made once more a desperate
effort to awaken pity. Stretching her clasped hands towards the man who
sat near her, she cried, in the piercing voice of misery, 'Oh take pity
on me! I am an orphan. I have heard that sailors have kindly
hearts--Have pity then--land me on the wildest coast, and I will fall
down and pray for you!' The person to whom she spoke having eyed her a
moment in silence, coolly drew in his oar; and rising, wrapped her close
in the cloak and laid her down in the bottom of the boat, advising her
with an oath to 'keep snug or she would capsize them.' In despair she
renounced all further effort. Silent and motionless she lay, the cold
spray dashing over her unheeded; till wet, chilled, and miserable, she
was lifted on board a small brig which lay about half a mile from the
shore. She was carried down to the cabin, which was more decent than is
usual in vessels of that size. A clean-looking woman attended to
undress her; night-clothes were in readiness for her; and every
accommodation provided which her situation rendered possible. Every
thing served to convince her of the care and precaution with which this
cruel scheme had been concerted, and to shew her the depth of the snare
into which she had fallen.

She was laid in her narrow crib, ere it occurred to her that Hargrave
might be near to watch his prey. Exhausted as she was, sleep fled at the
thought. She listened for his voice, for his footstep, amid the unwonted
discord that disturbed her ear. Daylight returned, and no sound reached
her more terrible than that of the gale rattling in the cordage and
dashing the waves against the vessel's side. Worn out with fatigue and
suffering, she slept at length; and a mid-day sun glanced by fits
through her grated window ere she awoke to a new sense of sorrow. She
rose, and going upon deck, looked sadly back upon the way she had
unconsciously passed. Behind, the blue mountains were sinking in the
distance; on the left lay a coast unknown to her; before her stretched
the boundless deep, unvaried save by the whitening surge.

Laura spent most of her time upon deck, the fresh air reviving her
failing spirits. One male and one female attendant seemed appropriated
to her, and served her with even officious assiduity. Hoping that some
opportunity might occur of transmitting an account of her situation to
England, she begged these obsequious attendants to supply her with
writing materials; but was firmly, though respectfully, refused.

The third morning came, and Laura looked in vain for any object to vary
the immeasurable waste. The sun rose from one unbending line, and sunk
again in naked majesty. She observed that the course of the vessel was
in general directly west; and if she had before doubted, this
circumstance would have convinced her of her destination. She once
ventured to inquire whither the ship was bound, but was answered that
'she should know that when she reached the port.'

It was on the fourth of May that Laura began her ill-omened voyage. On
the twelfth of June, land! All ran to gaze with glad eyes on what seemed
a low cloud, faintly descried on the verge of the horizon--all but
Laura, who looked sadly forward, as to the land of exile, of
degradation,--of death. Day after day that dreaded land approached;
till, by degrees, the boundless ocean was narrowed to a mighty river,
and the unfrequent sail, almost too distant for mortal sight, was
multiplied to a busy fleet, plying in every direction their cheerful
labours. At length a city appeared in view, rising like an amphitheatre,
and flashing bright with a material unknown to European architecture.
Laura inquired what town it was; and, though refused all information,
surmised that Quebec lay before her.

Opposite the town, the ship hove to; a boat was launched, and Laura
expected to be sent on shore. Nor did she unwillingly prepare to go.
'Surely,' thought she, 'in this populous city some one will be found to
listen to my tale, and wrest me from the arm of the oppressor.' The boat
however departed without her, carrying ashore the man who had hitherto
attended her. After remaining on shore for several hours, the man
returned, and the vessel again proceeded in her voyage. Laura now
imagined that Montreal was her destined port; and again she strove to
hope that, among numbers, she should find aid.

A still cloudy evening had succeeded to a sultry day, when Laura
observed an unusual bustle upon deck. It was growing dark, when, as she
leant over the rail, to watch the fire-flies that flashed like stars in
the air, the captain approaching her, told her that she must go ashore,
and immediately lifted her into a boat which lay along-side. Her
attendants and baggage were already there; the sailors had taken their
oars; and, roaring to their companions a rough 'good night,' made
towards the land. Instead, however, of gaining the nearest point, they
rowed into what in the darkness seemed a creek; but Laura soon perceived
that, having left the great river on which they had hitherto sailed,
they were following the course of one of its tributary streams. The
darkness prevented her from distinguishing objects on the banks, though
now and then a light, glimmering from a casement, shewed that the haunts
of man were near. She could not even discern the countenances of the
sailors; but she observed, that he who seemed to direct the others,
spoke in a voice which was new to her ear. All night the rowers toiled
up the stream. The day dawned; and Laura perceived that, passing an open
cultivated plain, she was pursuing her course towards woods impervious
to the light. Dark and tangled they lowered over the stream, till they
closed round, and every cheerful object was blotted from the scene.




CHAPTER XXXIII


The travellers had proceeded for some time shaded by the overhanging
woods, the distance lengthened by the dreary sameness of their way, when
a wild halloo smote Laura's ear; and she perceived that three Indians
stood at the water-edge, making signs for the boat to land. To her
unspeakable surprise, the sailors joyfully obeyed the signal. They ran
their bark into a creek to which the Indians pointed, and cheerfully
busied themselves in discharging their cargo. Placed with her attendants
on a little eminence, which rose above the swampy margin of the river,
Laura took a fearful survey of the scene around her. Save where the
sluggish stream opened to the day, her view was bounded to a few yards
of marshy ground, rank with unwholesome vegetation. No track appeared to
lead from this desolate spot. Between the gigantic pines, brushwood and
coarse grass spread in sad luxuriance. No trace was here of human
footstep. All was dreary and forlorn, as the land which the first
wanderers visited unwilling.

She had not long continued her melancholy survey, when the two stoutest
of the Indians approached; and one of them, after talking apart with her
attendants, lifted her female servant in his arms, and walked on. The
other, making some uncouth gestures, prepared to raise Laura from the
ground. She shrunk back alarmed; but the Indian, in broken French,
assured her that he would not hurt her; and, pointing towards the woods,
reminded her of the difficulty of passing them on foot. Her valet, too,
represented the fatigue she must undergo, if she refused the assistance
of the Indian. But Laura preferring a toilsome march to such a mode of
conveyance, persevered in her refusal; and, bidding them lead the way,
followed into the pathless wild.

They continued their journey for several hours, no object meeting their
sight that might mark the stages of their way. No work of man appeared,
not even the faintest trace that ever man had toiled through this
wilderness; yet Laura perceived that the Indians proceeded without
hesitation. The position of the grass, the appearance of the leaves,
gave indication sufficient to guide them in their route. One of them
carried a bag of provisions; and having reached a spot where the ground
was firm and dry, he invited Laura to sit down and take some
refreshment. Faint with fatigue, Laura thankfully acceded. Scarcely,
however, had she seated herself on the grass, ere her attention was
drawn by a slight though unusual noise; and she was told that it was
caused by a rattlesnake. At this intelligence her maid, screaming,
started up, and was going to dart forward into the wood. The Indians
beheld her terror with silent contempt, while Laura calmly detained her
with gentle force. 'Stay, Mary,' said she. 'If you tread on the animal
you are gone! If we are quiet, we may probably see and avoid it.' The
influence which Laura always acquired over those with whom she lived,
prevailed over Mary's dread; and in a few moments the serpent was seen
by one of the Indians, who killed it with a single blow.

Their hasty meal ended, the party proceeded on their way; but they had
not gone far ere Laura, worn out with toil and sorrow, sunk upon the
ground. She had now no choice; and the Indian, lifting her with the same
ease as she would have done an infant, went on with more speed than
before.

Towards the close of the day, the woods suddenly opened into a small
field, surrounded by them on every side, which appeared to have been
itself imperfectly redeemed from the same state of waste luxuriance. In
the centre stood a house, or rather cabin, rudely constructed of the
material which nature so lavishly supplied. Around it a small patch,
inclosed by a palisade, bore marks of forsaken cultivation. Beyond this
inclosure, logs of prodigious size lay scattered through the field, and
the roots, which had not been cleared from the ground, were again
shooting luxuriantly. With a faint sensation of gladness, Laura beheld
traces of humankind. Yet no living creature appeared. Here reigned
primeval stillness. The winds had died away. A sultry calm filled the
air. The woods were motionless. The birds were silent. All was fixed as
in death, save where a dull stream stole under the tall canes that
deformed its margin.

Mary's exclamations of grief and surprise first informed Laura that she
had reached her home. To Laura the dreariness of the scene was of small
concern. No outward circumstances could add to the horrors with which
her fears were familiar. While her attendant bewailed aloud that ever
thirst of gain had lured her from happy England, Laura was inwardly
striving to revive the hope that sudden death might snatch her from the
grasp of the oppressor; and renewing her oft repeated prayer,--'Oh that
Thou wouldst hide me in the grave.' But no selfish sorrow could make her
regardless of the woes of others. 'Courage, Mary,' said she, with a
foreboding smile, 'we shall soon be released; and both, I hope, find
shelter in our Father's house.'

The cabin was divided into three apartments, each entering from the
other. To the innermost Laura was conducted; and she saw that it had
been arranged for her. The window was secured with iron. The furniture,
unlike that of the other rooms, was new and not inelegant. Laura looked
round to observe whether any trace of Hargrave's presence was visible.
None appeared. She examined every recess and corner of her new abode, as
one who fears the lurking assassin. She ascertained that Hargrave was
not its inmate; and thanked Heaven for the prospect of one night of
peace. It was in vain, however, that she tried to discover how long this
reprieve might last. The servants either could not or would not give her
any information. She was too well acquainted with the character of her
oppressor to hope that he would long delay his coming. 'To-morrow,
perhaps'--thought she; and the cold shivering came over her, which now
ever followed her anticipation of the future. 'Yet why do I despair?'
said she. 'Is any time too short, are any means too feeble for the
Power--for the wisdom in which I trust? But since the hour of trial may
be so near, let me not waste the time which should prepare for
it,--prepare to cast off this poor clog of earth, and rise beyond its
sorrows and its stains.'

Laura's bodily frame, however, could not long keep pace with the efforts
of her mind, for her health and strength were failing under the
continued influence of grief and fear. The form, once rounded in fair
proportion, was wasted to a shadow. The once graceful neck bent
mournfully forward. The lily arms hung down in listless melancholy. The
cheek, once of form inimitable, was sunk and hollow now. The colour,
once quick to tell the modest thought, was fixed in the paleness of the
dead. And death was ever present to her thoughts,--sole point to which
her hope turned steadily!

One only desire lingered on earth. She wished that some friend should
pity her hard fate, and know that the victim had shrunk from it, though
in vain. Intending to leave behind her some attestation of her
innocence, she besought Mary to procure for her the means of writing.
'Why should you fear to trust me?' said she. 'To whom upon earth can my
complaint reach now? You may see all I write, Mary; and perhaps when I
am gone you will yourself convey it to my friend. Your master will not
prevent you then; for then he will have pity on me, and wish that he had
not dealt with me so hardly.' The irresistible sweetness of Laura had
won the heart of her attendant, and Mary promised that she would
endeavour to gratify her. She said that the writing materials were kept
carefully locked up by Robert, the man-servant; that his master's orders
on that subject had been peremptory; that she was sure he would not
venture to disobey while there remained a possibility of conveying
intelligence from the place of their confinement; that two of the
Indians were to depart on the following day; that after they were gone,
no means of access to the habitable world remaining, Robert might
possibly relax his strictness, and permit Laura to amuse herself with
writing. Mary's words awakened in Laura's mind an idea that all was not
yet lost. The Indians were suspected of favouring her. They might then
bear her appeal to human pity, to human justice. If she could find means
to speak with them apart, she would plead so earnestly that even savages
would be moved to mercy! At these thoughts a ray of hope once more
kindled in her breast. It was the last. All day she watched for an
opportunity to address one of the Indians. In vain! Robert guarded her
with such relentless fidelity, that she found it impossible to effect
her purpose. The Indians departed. Mary performed her promise, and the
unfortunate Laura wrote the following letter, which was afterwards, with
Hargrave's permission, conveyed to Mrs Douglas.

     'From this dreary land of exile, to whom shall I address myself
     save to you, mine own friend, and my father's friend? Where
     tell my sad fate save to you, who first taught me the hope that
     lives beyond it? And let it comfort your kind heart to know,
     that while you are shedding tears over this last memorial of
     your Laura, I shall be rejoicing in the full consummation of
     that hope.

     'There is indeed another friend! One to whom my last earthly
     thoughts are due! But I cannot tell him, that she who was
     almost the wife of his bosom is gone down to a dishonoured
     grave. I have not time to soften my sad tale to him, nor to
     study words of comfort; for the moments are precious with me
     now. A few, a very few, are all that remain for preparation. I
     must not rob them of their awful right. Tell him my story as he
     is able to bear it. Tell him my innocence, and he will believe
     it, for he knew my very soul. But I must hasten, lest the
     destroyer come, ere, in these lines, I close my connection with
     this world of trial.'

     [She then proceeded to give a simple narrative of her wrongs.
     She expressed no bitterness against the author of them. She
     spoke of him as a misguided being, and pitied the anguish which
     he was preparing for himself.] 'Tell Mr De Courcy,' she
     proceeded, 'that I charge him, by all the love he bears me, to
     forgive my enemy, even from the heart forgive him. Let him do
     more. Let him pray for him; and if they meet, admonish him. It
     may be that his heart will soften when he remembers me.'

     [The remainder of the letter was written at intervals. Laura
     spent her time chiefly in acts of devotion, of
     self-examination, and repentance. It was only when exhausted
     nature could no longer follow these exercises of the soul, that
     she returned to add another line to her picture of
     wretchedness.]

     'The saints who resisted unto blood striving against sin, who
     gave up their lives in defence of the truth, looked forward to
     the hour of their departure rejoicing. But I must go to the
     grave laden with shame and sorrow. My soul is weary of my life,
     and yet I must fear to die. Yet let my enemy a little while
     delay his coming and my death also will be joyful. Let him stay
     only a few days, and I shall be deaf to the voice of the
     oppressor. I am wasting fast away. If he haste not to catch the
     shadow, it will be gone.--

     'The people whom he has appointed to guard his poor prisoner,
     no longer watch me as they once did. It is useless now. A few
     short steps and my feeble limbs bend to the earth, reminding me
     whither I am hastening.--

     'When I am gone, Mary will carry you the ringlets which you
     were wont to twine round your finger. Send one of them to her
     who should have been my sister; but give not any to my own
     Montague, for he will pine over them when he might be happy in
     some new connection. Yet tell him that I loved him to the end.
     I believe he sometimes doubted of my love; but tell him that I
     bore him a firm affection. Passion is unfit for the things of
     this world.--

     'I have a letter from my enemy. In two days more.--

     'I have a knife concealed in my bosom. All night it is hidden
     beneath my pillow; and when my weary eyes close for a moment, I
     grasp it, and the chill touch rouses me again. Mine own dear
     friend, did you think when first you taught me to join my
     little hands in prayer, that these hands should be stained with
     murder?--

     'Is it a crime to die when I can no longer live with innocence?
     When there is no escape but in the grave, is it forbidden to
     hide me there? My mind grows feeble now. I cannot discern
     between good and evil.--

     'Why is my soul bowed down to the dust, as if the fountain of
     compassion were sealed? I will yet trust Him who is the helper
     of those who have no help in man. It may be that he will melt
     the heart of my enemy, and move him to let me die in peace. Or
     perhaps even the sight of my persecutor may be permitted to
     burst the rending heart--to scare the trembling spirit from its
     prison.--

     'This day is my last, and it is closing now! The silence of
     midnight is around me. Ere it again return a deeper night shall
     close for me, and the weary pilgrim shall sink to rest. It is
     time that I loosen me from the earth; I will not give my last
     hours to this land of shadows. Then fare you well, mine own
     dear friend! You first pointed my wishes to that better world
     where I shall not long wait your coming. And far thee well,
     mine own Montague! Take comfort. I was not fit to linger here;
     for I had desires that earth could not satisfy; and thirstings
     after a perfection which this weak heart could not attain.
     Farewell--I will look back no more.'


     HARGRAVE'S LETTER TO LAURA.

     'My dearest Laura--The tantalizing business which has so long
     thwarted my wishes will still detain me for two days. Your
     gentle mind cannot imagine what this delay costs me. My only
     recompense is, that it affords me an opportunity of shewing you
     somewhat of that consideration with which I could always wish
     to treat you. I willingly forego the advantage of surprise for
     the sake of allowing you to exercise that decision which you
     are so well qualified to use discreetly. You know Laura how I
     have doated on you. For near four long years you have been the
     desire of my soul; and now that my happy daring has placed me
     within reach of my utmost wishes, I would fain attain them
     without distress to you. This is no time for concealment; and
     you must pardon me if I am explicit with you. I have known the
     disposition of Lady Pelham's fortune from the hour when it was
     made. You know that with all my faults I am not sordid; but
     circumstances have rendered money necessary to me. Except in
     the event of Lord Lincourt's death, I cannot return to England
     otherwise than as your husband. I will own, too, dearest Laura,
     that after all I have done, and all that I may be compelled to
     do, I dare not trust for pardon to your pity alone. I must
     interest your duty in my cause. Consider your situation, then,
     my beloved, and spare me the pain of distressing you. I have
     watched you, implored you, pined for you--I have borne your
     coldness, your scorn. I have ventured my life to obtain you.
     Judge whether I be of a temper to be baulked of my reward. You
     must be mine, bewitching Laura. No cool, insulting, plausible
     pretender can cheat me of you now. Trackless woods divide you
     from all human kind. I have provided against the possibility of
     tracing your retreat. It rests with you then to choose whether
     you will bless my love with a willing and honourable reward, or
     force me to extort the power of bestowing obligation. My
     charming Laura, for now indeed I may call you mine, pardon, in
     consideration of its sincerity, the abrupt language I am
     compelled to hold.--One thing more. In three weeks I must
     return hither. The engagement of your British attendants
     expires before that time. I cannot for a moment allow myself to
     suppose that you will prefer a hopeless solitary exile to the
     reparation which I shall even then be so anxious to make; to
     the endearments of a fond husband, of an impassioned lover; to
     the envy and the homage of an admiring world. Suffer me rather,
     dear lovely girl, to exult in the hope that you will receive,
     without reluctance, the man to whom fate assigns you, and that
     you will recal somewhat of the tenderness you once confessed
     for your own ever-devoted,

                               'VILLIERS HARGRAVE.'


     LAURA'S ANSWER
     (sent with the foregoing to Mrs Douglas:)

     'I thought my spirit had been broken, crushed never more to
     rise. Must the glow of indignation mingle with the damps of
     death? But I will not upbraid you. The language of forgiveness
     best befits me now. The measure of your injuries to me is
     almost full; while those which you have heaped upon yourself
     are yet more deep and irreparable. My blasted fame, my life
     cut off in its prime, even the horrible dread that has
     overwhelmed me, are nothing to the pangs of hopeless remorse,
     the unaccepted struggle for repentance.--Yet a little while,
     and this darkness shall burst into light ineffable. Yet a
     little while, and this sorrow shall be as the remembrance of a
     troubled dream. But you--Oh Hargrave, have pity on yourself!

     'It was not to warn, it was to plead with you, that I won on my
     knees the consent of your messenger to bear my reply. I will
     strive to hope; for you were not always pitiless. I have seen
     you feel for the sufferings of a stranger, and have you no
     mercy for me? Alas! in those pitying tears I saw you shed,
     began this long train of evil; for then began my base idolatry,
     and justly have you been made the instrument of my punishment.

     'My mind wanders. I am weaker than a child. Oh Hargrave, if you
     have human pity let the feeble spark expire in peace. Here,
     where no Christian footstep shall hallow the turf that covers
     me, nor song of Christian praise rise near my grave, here let
     me lay me down and die--and I will bless you that I die in
     peace. I dare not spend my parting breath in uttering unholy
     vows, nor die a voluntary partner in your crimes. Nor would I,
     had my life been prolonged, have joined to pollution this dust,
     which, perishable as it is, must rise to immortality--which,
     vile as it is, more vile as it soon may be, shall yet "put on
     incorruption." Why then should you come hither? Will it please
     you to see this poor piece of clay, for which you have ventured
     your soul, faded to an object of horror?--cast uncoffined into
     the earth, robbed of the decencies which Christians pay even to
     the worst of sinners? When you look upon my stiffened corpse
     will you then triumph in the security of your possession? Will
     you again exult in hope when you turn from my grave and say,
     "here lies the wretch whom I have undone!"

     'Come not I charge you, if you would escape the anguish of the
     murderer. When did the evil of your deeds stop within your
     first intention? Do not amuse your conscience with the dream of
     reparation. I am fallen indeed, ere you dare insult me with the
     thought! Will you wed the dead? Or could I outlive your
     injuries, think you that I would sink so low as to repay them
     with myself?--reward with vows of love a crime more black than
     murder! Though my name, already degraded through you, must no
     more claim alliance with the good and worthy, think you that I
     would bind myself before heaven to a wretch who owed his very
     life to my undeserved mercy? Inhuman! Your insults have roused
     the failing spirit. Yet I must quell these last stirrings of
     nature. Instant, full, and free must be my forgiveness; for
     such is the forgiveness which I shall soon require.

     'Perhaps, as now you seem to think me fit for any baseness, you
     will suppose my forebodings a poor deceit to win you from your
     purpose. See then if you can trace in these unsteady lines the
     vigour of health. Ask him who bears them to you, how looks now
     the face which you call lovely? Ask him if the hand which gave
     this letter looks soft and graceful now? I love to gaze upon
     it. It bids me hope, for it is like no living thing. Inquire
     minutely. Ask if there remains one charm to lure you on to
     farther guilt. And if death has already seized on all, if he
     has spared nothing to desire, will you yet hurry him on his
     prey? You have made life a burden too heavy for the weary
     frame. Will you make death too dreadful to be endured? Will you
     add to its horrors till nature and religion shrink from it in
     agony.

     'I cannot plead with you as I would. My strength fails. My eyes
     are dim with weeping. Oh grant that this farewell may be the
     last--that we may meet no more till I welcome you with the joy
     which angels feel over the sinner that repenteth.'

The whole of the night preceding Hargrave's arrival, was passed by Laura
in acts of devotion. In her life, blameless as it had appeared to
others, she saw so much ground for condemnation, that, had her hopes
rested upon her own merit, they would have vanished like the sunshine of
a winter storm. Their support was more mighty; and they remained
unshaken. The raptures of faith beamed on her soul. By degrees they
triumphed over every fear; and the first sound that awoke the morning,
was her voice raised in a trembling hymn of praise.

Her countenance elevated as in hope; her eyes cast upwards; her hands
clasped; her lips half open in the unfinished adoration; her face
brightened with a smile, the dawn of eternal day--she was found by her
attendant. Awe-struck, the woman paused, and at a reverend distance
gazed upon the seraph; but her entrance had called back the unwilling
spirit from its flight; and Laura, once more a feeble child of earth,
faintly inquired whether her enemy were at hand. Mary answered that her
master was not expected to arrive before the evening; and entreated that
Laura would try to recruit her spirits, and accept of some refreshment.
Laura made no opposition. She unconsciously swallowed what was placed
before her; unwittingly suffered her attendant to lead her abroad; nor
once heeded ought that was done to her, nor ought that passed before her
eyes, till her exhausted limbs found rest upon the trunk of a tree,
which lay mouldering near the spot where its root was sending forth a
luxuriant thicket.

The breath of morning blew chill on the wasted form of Laura, while it
somewhat revived her to strength and recollection. Her attendant seeing
her shiver in the breeze, compassionately wrapped her more closely in
her cloak, and ran to seek a warmer covering. 'She feels for my bodily
wants,' said Laura. 'Will she have no pity for the sufferings of the
soul? Yet what relief can she afford: What help is there for me in man?
Oh be Thou my help who art the guard of the defenceless! Thou who canst
shield in every danger--Thou who canst guide in every difficulty!'

Her eye rested as it fell, upon a track as of recent footsteps. They had
brushed away the dew, and the rank grass had not yet risen from their
pressure. The unwonted trace of man's presence arrested her attention;
and her mind, exhausted by suffering, and sharing the weakness of its
frail abode, admitted the superstitious thought that these marks
afforded a providential indication for her guidance. Transient animation
kindling in her frame, she followed the track as it wound round a
thicket of poplar; then, suddenly recollecting herself, she became
conscious of the delusion, and shed a tear over her mental decay.

She was about to return, when she perceived that she was near the bank
of the river. Its dark flood was stealing noiseless by, and Laura,
looking on it, breathed the oft repeated wish that she could seek rest
beneath its waves. Again she moved feebly forward. She reached the brink
of the stream, and stood unconsciously following its course with her
eye; when a light wind stirring the canes that grew down to the water
edge, she beheld close by her an Indian canoe. With suddenness that
mocks the speed of light, hope flashed on the darkened soul; and,
stretching her arms in wild ecstasy, 'Help, help,' cried Laura, and
sprung towards the boat. A feeble echo from the further shore alone
returned the cry. Again she called. No human voice replied. But
delirious transport lent vigour to her frame. She sprung into the bark;
she pressed the slender oar against the bank. The light vessel yielded
to her touch. It floated. The stream bore it along. The woods closed
around her prison. 'Thou hast delivered me!' she cried; and sunk
senseless.

A meridian sun beat on her uncovered head ere Laura began to revive.
Recollection stole upon her like the remembrance of a feverish dream. As
one who, waking from a fearful vision, still trembles in his joy, she
scarcely dared to hope that the dread hour was past, till raising her
eyes she saw the dark woods bend over her, and steal slowly away as the
canoe glided on with the tide. The raptures of fallen man own their
alliance with pain, by seeking the same expression. Joy and gratitude
too big for utterance long poured themselves forth in tears. At length
returning composure permitting the language of extasy, it was breathed
in the accents of devotion; and the lone wild echoed to a song of
deliverance.

The saintly strain rose unmixed with other sound. No breeze moaned
through the impervious woods. No ripple broke the stream. The dark
shadows trembled for a moment in its bosom as the little bark stole by,
and then reposed again. No trace appeared of human presence. The fox
peeping from the brushwood, the wild duck sailing stately in the stream,
saw the unwonted stranger without alarm, untaught as yet to flee from
the destroyer.

The day declined; and Laura, with the joy of her escape, began to mingle
a wish, that, ere the darkness closed around her, she might find shelter
near her fellow beings. She was not ignorant of the dangers of her
voyage. She knew that the navigation of the river was interrupted by
rapids. A cataract which broke its course had been purposely described
in her hearing. She examined her frail vessel and trembled; for life was
again become precious, and feeble seemed her defence against the
torrent. The canoe, which could not have contained more than two
persons, was constructed of a slender frame of wood, covered with the
bark of the birch. It yielded to the slightest motion, and caution was
necessary to poise in it even the light form of Laura.

Slowly it floated down the lingering tide; and, when a pine of larger
size or form more fantastic than his fellows enabled her to measure her
progress, she thought that through wilds less impassible her own limbs
would have borne her more swiftly. In vain behind each tangled point did
her fancy picture the haunt of man. Vainly amid the mists of eve did she
trace the smoke of sheltered cottages. In vain at every winding of the
stream she sent forward a longing eye in search of human dwelling. The
narrow view was bounded by the dark wilderness, repeating ever the same
picture of dreary repose.

The sun went down. The shadows of evening fell; not such as in her
happy native land blend softly with the last radiance of day; but black
and heavy, harshly contrasting with the light of a naked sky reflected
from the waters, where they spread beyond the gloom of impending woods.
Dark, and more dark the night came on. Solemn even amid the peopled
land, in this vast solitude it became more awful. Ignorant how near the
place of danger might be, fearing to pursue darkling her perilous way,
Laura tried to steer her light bark to the shore, intending to moor it,
to find in it a rude resting place, and in the morning to pursue her
way. Laboriously she toiled, and at length reached the bank in safety;
but in vain she tried to draw her little vessel to land. Its weight
resisted her strength. Dreading that it should slip from her grasp and
leave her without means of escape, she re-entered it, and again glided
on in her dismal voyage. She had found in the canoe a little coarse
bread made of Indian corn; and this, with the water of the river, formed
her whole sustenance. Her frame worn out with previous suffering, awe
and fear at last yielded to fatigue; and the weary wanderer sunk to
sleep.

It was late on the morning of a cloudy day, when a low murmuring sound
stealing on the silence awoke Laura from the rest of innocence. She
listened. The murmur seemed to swell on her ear. She looked up. The dark
woods still bent over her. But they no longer touched the margin of the
stream. They stretched their giant arms from the summit of a precipice.
Their image was no more reflected unbroken. The gray rocks which
supported them but half lent their colours to the rippling water. The
wild duck, no longer tempting the stream, flew screaming over its bed.
Each object hastened on with fearful rapidity, and the murmuring sound
was now a deafening roar.

Fear supplying super-human strength, Laura strove to turn the course of
her vessel. She strained every nerve; she used the force of desperation.
Half-hoping that the struggle might save her, half-fearing to note her
dreadful progress, she toiled on till the oar was torn from her
powerless grasp, and hurried along with the tide.

The fear of death alone had not the power to overwhelm the soul of
Laura. Somewhat might yet be done perhaps to avert her fate, at least to
prepare for it. Feeble as was the chance of life, it was not to be
rejected. Fixing her cloak more firmly about her, Laura bound it to the
slender frame of the canoe. Then commending herself to heaven with the
fervour of a last prayer, she, in dread stillness, awaited her doom.

With terrible speed the vessel hurried on. It was whirled round by the
torrent--tossed fearfully--and hurried on again. It shot over a
smoothness more dreadful than the eddying whirl. It rose upon its prow.
Laura clung to it in the convulsion of terror. A moment she trembled on
the giddy verge. The next, all was darkness!




CHAPTER XXXIV


When Laura was restored to recollection, she found herself in a plain
decent apartment. Several persons of her own sex were humanely busied in
attending her. Her mind retaining a confused remembrance of the past,
she inquired where she was, and how she had been brought thither. An
elderly woman, of a prepossessing appearance, answered with almost
maternal kindness, 'that she was among friends all anxious for her
safety; begged that she would try to sleep; and promised to satisfy her
curiosity when she should be more able to converse.' This benevolent
person, whose name was Falkland, then administered a restorative to her
patient; and Laura, uttering almost incoherent expressions of gratitude,
composed herself to rest.

Awakening refreshed and collected, she found Mrs Falkland and one of her
daughters still watching by her bed-side. Laura again repeated her
questions, and Mrs Falkland fulfilled her promise, by relating that her
husband, who was a farmer, having been employed with his two sons in a
field which overlooked the river, had observed the canoe approach the
fall; that seeing it too late to prevent the accident, they had hurried
down to the bed of the stream below the cataract, in hopes of
intercepting the boat at its reappearance: That being accustomed to
float wood down the torrent, they knew precisely the spot where their
assistance was most likely to prove effectual: That the canoe, though
covered with foam for a moment, had instantly risen again, and that Mr
Falkland and his sons had, not without danger, succeeded in drawing it
to land. She then, in her turn, inquired by what accident Laura had been
exposed to such a perilous adventure; expressing her wonder at the
direction of her voyage, since Falkland farm was the last inhabited spot
in that district. Laura, mingling her natural reserve with a desire to
satisfy her kind hostess, answered, that she had been torn from her
friends by an inhuman enemy, and that her perilous voyage was the least
effect of his barbarity. 'Do you know,' said Mrs Falkland, somewhat
mistaking her meaning, 'that to his cruelty you partly owe your life;
for had he not bound you to the canoe, you must have sunk while the boat
floated on.' Laura heard with a faint smile the effect of her
self-possession; but considering it as a call to pious gratitude rather
than a theme of self-applause, she forbore to offer any claim to praise;
and suffered the subject to drop without further explanation.

Having remained for two days with this hospitable family, Laura
expressed a wish to depart. She communicated to Mr Falkland her desire
of returning immediately to Europe; and begged that he would introduce
her to some asylum where she might wait the departure of a vessel for
Britain. She expressed her willingness to content herself with the
poorest accommodation, confessing that she had not the means of
purchasing any of a higher class. All the wealth, indeed, which she
could command, consisted in a few guineas which she had accidentally had
about her when she was taken from her home; and a ring which Mrs De
Courcy had given her at parting. Her hosts kindly urged her to remain
with them till they should ascertain that a vessel was immediately to
sail, in which she might secure her passage; assuring her that a week
scarcely ever elapsed without some departure for her native country.
Finding, however, that she was anxious to be gone, Mr Falkland himself
accompanied her to Quebec. They travelled by land. The country at first
bore the characters of a half redeemed wilderness. The road wound at
times through dreary woods, at others through fields where noxious
variety of hue bespoke imperfect cultivation. At last it approached the
great river; and Laura gazed with delight on the ever-changing, rich and
beautiful scenes which were presented to her view; scenes which she had
passed unheeded when grief and fear veiled every prospect in gloom. One
of the nuns in the Hotel Dieu was the sister of Mrs Falkland; and to her
care Mr Falkland intended to commit his charge. But before he had been
an hour in the town, he received information that a ship was weighing
anchor for the Clyde, and Laura eagerly embraced the opportunity. The
captain being informed by Mr Falkland, that she could not advance the
price of her passage, at first hesitated to receive her; but when, with
the irresistible candour and majesty that shone in all her looks and
words, she assured him of his reward, when she spoke to him in the
accents of his native land, the Scotsman's heart melted; and having
satisfied himself that she was a Highlander, he closed the bargain, by
swearing that he was sure he might trust her. With tears in her eyes,
Laura took leave of her benevolent host; yet her heart bounded with joy
as she saw the vessel cleaving the tide, and each object in the dreaded
land of exile swiftly retiring from her view. In a few days that dreaded
land disappeared. In a few more the mountains of Cape Breton sunk behind
the wave. The brisk gales of autumn wafted the vessel cheerfully on her
way; and often did Laura compute her progress.

In a clear frosty morning towards the end of September, she heard once
more the cry of land!--now music to her ear. Now with a beating breast
she ran to gaze upon a ridge of mountains indenting the disk of the
rising sun; but the tears of rapture dimmed her eyes, when every voice
at once shouted, 'Scotland!'

All day Laura remained on deck, oft measuring, with the light splinter,
the vessel's course through the deep. The winds favoured not her
impatience. Towards evening they died away, and scarcely did the vessel
steal along the liquid mirror. Another and another morning came, and
Laura's ear was blessed with the first sounds of her native land. The
tolling of a bell was borne along the water; now swelling loud, and now
falling softly away. The humble village church was seen on the shore;
and Laura could distinguish the gay colouring of her country-women's
Sunday attire,--the scarlet plaid, transmitted from generation to
generation, pinned decently over the plain clean coif,--the bright blue
gown, the trophy of more recent housewifery. To her every form in the
well-known garb seemed the form of a friend. The blue mountains in the
distance,--the scattered woods,--the fields yellow with the
harvest,--the river sparkling in the sun, seemed, to the wanderer
returning from the land of strangers, fairer than the gardens of
Paradise.

Land of my affections!--when 'I forget thee, may my right hand forget
her cunning!' Blessed be thou among nations! Long may thy wanderers
return to thee rejoicing, and their hearts throb with honest pride when
they own themselves thy children!

The vessel at last cast anchor, and all was cheerful bustle; every one
eager to hurry ashore. Some hastened to launch the boat; some ran below
to seek out the little offerings of love which they had brought for
their friends. Never had Laura heard sound so animating as the cry of
'all ready!' followed by the light short stroke of the oar that sent
her swiftly forward. Many a wistful glance did the rowers turn. 'There's
mother on the pier-head!' cried one. 'I see Annie and the bairns!' cried
another; and the oar was plied more swiftly. They landed. The shout of
joy, and the whisper of affection were exchanged on every side. Laura
stood back from the tumult, breathing a silent thanksgiving on behalf of
herself and her companions. 'Poor lassie!' said the captain, approaching
her, 'is there naebody to welcome thee? Come! I'm going up to Glasgow
the night to see my wife and the owners; and if ye like to gang wi' me,
ye'll be sae far on your way to your friends.' Laura thankfully accepted
the proposal; and the fly-boat being just about to sail up the river,
she placed in it the little packet of necessaries which she had
collected at Quebec; and accompanied the good-natured sailor to his
home.

She was kindly received by his wife and daughter, and furnished with the
best accommodations they could command. The next morning she gave the
captain a draft for the price of her passage; and producing her purse
and Mrs De Courcy's ring, offered them as further security; saying, that
as she was now in her own country, a few shillings would support her
till she reached her friends, since she might travel to Perthshire on
foot. The sailor, however, positively refused to accept of any thing
more than the draft, swearing that if he were deceived in Laura, he
would never trust woman again. He then, at her desire, procured her a
seat in the stage-coach, and once more she proceeded on her journey.

At a small village, a few miles from Perth, she desired to be set down.
A by-road led from the village to Mr Douglas's parish. The distance was
said to be only seven miles; and Laura, forgetting the latitude allowed
to Scotish measurement, thought she might easily reach the parsonage
before night-fall. Leaving her little parcel at the village, she
hastened forward;--now pausing a moment as some well-known peak or cliff
met her eye, now bounding on with the light step of joy. She pictured
the welcome of affection; already she saw the mild countenance of her
early friend; already she felt the embrace of love.

Darkness surprised her when she had yet much of her journey to perform,
and had shrouded every object ere she reached the well-known gate, and
saw across the narrow lawn the lights streaming from the window. She
stopped--fear stealing on her joy. In five months what changes might not
have happened! Her friend, her mother, might be ill, might be dead! So
must weak men mitigate with the prospect of evil the transports which
belong not to his inheritance! She again proceeded. She entered the
hall. The parlour door was open. A group of cheerful faces appeared,
ruddy with youth and health; but Laura's eye rested on one of more
mature, more interesting grace,--one shaded with untimely silver, and
lighted up with milder fires. She remained motionless, fearing to
surprise her friend by too suddenly appearing, till one of the girls,
observing her, exclaimed, in a transport of joy, 'Laura! Mamma! Laura!'
Mrs Douglas sprung from her seat; and the welcome of affection, the
embrace of love were reality!

The first burst of gladness was succeeded by the solicitous inquiry, by
the interesting narrative; and Laura beguiled her friend of many tears
by the story of her sad voyage, her hopeless captivity, her perilous
escape. Tears, too, of real bitterness rose to her eyes, at the thought
that, although she had escaped from the cruelty of her oppressor, yet
its consequences must be lasting as her life; and that she was now
pouring her story perhaps into the only ear that would be open to her
protestations of innocence. But she would not cloud the hour of joy by
calling the attention of her friend to the shade that rested on her
prospects; nor diminish her own gratitude for deliverance from more real
misfortune, by anticipating the scorns of the world. She uttered not the
faintest foreboding of evil, but continued with serene cheerfulness to
'charm as she was wont to do,' till at a late hour the friendly party
separated for the night.

Weary as she was, Laura could not rest. She had a task to perform too
painful to be thought of with indifference. It was necessary to write to
De Courcy; and to damp all the pleasure which a knowledge of her safety
would convey, by retracting engagements which had been made when her
alliance inferred no dishonour. She well knew that De Courcy himself,
convinced of her innocence, would spurn the idea of forsaking her in
misfortune,--of giving, by his desertion, a sanction to calumny. And
should she take advantage of his honour and his love to fix in his heart
the incurable anguish of following to the wife of his bosom the glance
of suspicion or of scorn! The world's neglect was trivial in her
estimation. Even its reproach might be endured by one who could appeal
from its sentence to a higher tribunal. But what should ease the heart
whose best affections were turned to poison by domestic shame; the heart
jealous of the honour which it could not defend, bleeding at the stab
from which it dared not recoil?

Laura had already taken her resolution, and the next day saw it
effected. She wrote to De Courcy, detailing minutely every event that
had befallen her from the hour of their separation till her landing in
Britain. There her narrative closed. She told not in what spot the
wanderer had found rest. She did not even intimate in what part of the
island she had disembarked, lest it should furnish a clue to her present
retreat. Nor did she, by expressions of tenderness and regret, aggravate
the pang which she was compelled to inflict. In words like these she
proceeded. 'And now, my respected friend, I imagine you are pausing to
offer a thanksgiving for yourself and for me. Let it not damp your just
gratitude that somewhat of evil is permitted to mingle with this signal
deliverance. Let not my escape from misfortune the most dreadful be
forgotten, even though the world should refuse to believe in that
escape. For thus it must be. Known to have been in the power of that bad
man, will the harsh-judging world believe me innocent? Will it be
believed that he ventured to cast his very life upon my mercy, by
dragging me unwilling from my home? So long the sport of his ungoverned
passions, will it be believed that I have not even seen him?

'I know it will be difficult to convince you that an unjust sentence can
be pronounced against me. Certain yourself of the truth of my story, you
imagine that it will find easy credence with others. But even if we
could change the nature of man, and teach strangers to judge with the
candour of friendship, who shall furnish them with the materials for
judging? Not he, who, in corroborating my tale, must publish his own
disgrace! Not the weak Laura, who, by a constitutional defect, shrinks
even from the eye where she cannot read distrust!

'Consider all this, and you will at once perceive the reasons which
induce me to conceal myself from you for a time. Engagements formed
under circumstances now so materially changed I cannot consider as
binding. You, I fear, may think otherwise, and be hurried on by your
generous nature to tempt a fate which that very turn of mind would
render insupportable. My own part in this fate I think I can bear. The
share which would fall upon you, I own would crush me to the dust. My
spirits are not yet what they have been. I am weary of struggling with a
perverse heart, ever leading me aside from duty. I will not lend it arms
by exposing myself to entreaties and arguments to which I cannot yield
without betraying my best friend to anguish unpitied and hopeless;
anguish which would bear with double pressure on myself.

'A stain is fallen on my good name, and "the glory has departed from
me." Be it so! He who doth all things well hath chosen my lot, and his
choice shall be mine. I trust I shall be enabled to act as becomes one
who is degraded in the public eye. I have sometimes shrunk from the
approbation of the world--that little circle I mean which we are apt to
call the world. Now I will hide me from its censure; and shall find in
the duties which peculiarly belong to the fallen--the duties of
humility, of charity and of devotion--enough to make life still no
unpleasing pilgrimage. A good name has been justly likened to a
jewel--precious, not necessary. But if you, my dear friend, covet fame
for me, look forward to the time when an assembled universe shall behold
my acquittal, when a Judge, before whom the assembled universe is as
nothing, shall proclaim me for his own.'

This letter Laura accompanied with another, in which she begged Mrs De
Courcy's assistance in reconciling her son to the change in his
prospects. Both were inclosed by Mr Douglas to a friend in London, who
was directed to forward them by post; thus avoiding any trace of the
quarter from whence they came.

Her lot thus chosen, Laura began to make arrangements for entering on a
mode of life befitting her situation. Fearing that the shaft of slander
should glance aside from herself to the friends who still clung to her,
she steadily resisted Mrs Douglas's warm invitations to make the
parsonage her home. Her father's little farm at Glenalbert had been
annexed to one of larger size. The cottage remained untenanted, and
thither Laura determined to retire. Her fortune, however far from
affluent, she thought would suffice to support the humble establishment
which she meant to retain. One servant was sufficient for her who had
been accustomed to make few claims on the assistance of others. To
obviate the impropriety of living alone while yet extreme youth made
even nominal protection valuable, she invited an elderly widow lady,
poor, but respectable, to preside in her household. In necessary
preparations for her removal to Glenalbert, in affectionate assiduities
to the friends with whom she resided, in compensating to her own poor
for her long, though involuntary neglect of their claims, Laura sought a
refuge from painful reflection; and, if a sigh arose at the review of
her altered prospects, she called to mind her deliverance, and regret
was exchanged for thankfulness. The vain might have bewailed a
seclusion thus untimely, thus permanent; the worldly-minded might have
mourned the forfeiture of earthly prosperity; any spirit unsupported by
religion must have sunk under unmerited disgrace, embittered by keen
sense of shame and constitutional timidity. Laura was a Christian, and
she could even at times rejoice that the spirit of vanity was mortified,
the temptations of the world withdrawn; even where the blow was more
painful, she humbly believed that it was necessary, and thankfully owned
that it was kind.

The arrangements for her new establishment were soon completed, and the
time came when Laura was to begin her life of seclusion. The day before
her intended removal she completed her twentieth year; and Mrs Douglas
would have assembled a little group of friends to celebrate the
occasion, but Laura steadily opposed it. 'Let not one who is suspected,'
said she, 'assume the boldness of innocence! yet since the suspicion
wrongs me I will not wear the melancholy of guilt. Give the children a
holiday for my sake, and I shall be as playful and as silly as the
youngest of them.' The holiday was granted; and Laura, amidst the joyful
noisy little company that soon assembled round her, forgot that she was
an outcast.

She was busily searching every corner for the hidden handkerchief, the
little rogue who had concealed it in his shoe laughing the while and
clapping his hands in delight, when she started at the voice of a
stranger in the lobby; who was announcing that he had a letter for Mrs
Douglas, which he could deliver to no person but herself. The next
moment the stranger was shewn in to the room, and Laura with amazement
beheld her American attendant. The amazement on his part was still
greater. He started, he trembled, he at first shrunk from Laura, then
eagerly advancing towards her, 'Bless my soul, Madam!' he exclaimed,
'are you alive? Then Mary's words are true, and the angels watch over
you.'

It was some time before the man's astonishment would permit him to
declare his errand. At last when his curiosity had been partially
satisfied, he was prevailed upon to enter his narrative. 'You may
remember, Madam,' said he, addressing himself to Laura, 'it was the
morning we expected my master, (though I told Mary, for a make-believe,
that he would not come till evening,) that morning Mary took you out and
left you; for which I was mortal angry with her, for my mind misgave me
that some mischief would come of it. So she ran down to the place where
she left you sitting, but you were not there. Then she looked all about,
but she could see you nowhere. She was afraid to go among the canes,
for fear of the rattlesnakes, so she ran home and told me. So I went
with her, scolding her to be sure all the way. Well we sought and
sought, till at last, half in the water, and half on the shore, we found
your hat and then to be sure none of us never doubted that you had
drowned yourself; and Mary cried and wrung her hands like a distracted
creature, saying that my master was a wicked wretch that had broken your
heart, and often and often she wished that we could find you to give you
Christian burial, for she said she was sure your ghost would never let
her rest in her bed. But we had no drags, nor anything to take you up
with out of the water. Well, we were just in the midst of all our
troubles when my master came. "Well, Robert," says he, in his hearty
way, "Where is my angel?" I had not the heart to say a word; so with
that Mary ran forward sobbing like a baby, and says she, just off hand,
"Miss Montreville is in a watery grave, and I am sure, Sir, some heavy
judgment will light on him that drove her to it." So my master stood for
a moment thunderstruck, as it were, and then he flew upon us both like a
tiger, and shook us till he scarce left breath in us, and swore that it
was all a trick, and that he would make us produce you or he would have
our lives. So I tried to pacify him the best I could; but Mary answered
him, that it was all his own doing, and that he might seek you in the
river where he would find your corpse. This put my master quite beside
himself; and he catched her up, and flung her from him, just as if she
had been a kitten; and then he flew down to the river side, and I
followed him, and shewed him where we had found your hat; and explained
to him how it was not our fault, for we had both been very civil and
given you no disturbance at all, which you know Madam was true. So,
close to the place where we found your hat we saw the print of your
little shoe in the bank; and when my master saw it he grew quite
distracted, crying out that he had murdered you, and that he would
revenge you upon a wretch not fit to live (meaning himself, Madam), and
so he would have leaped into the river; but by this time one of the
servants he brought with him came up, and we forced him back to the
house. Then he grew more quiet; and called for Mary, and gave her his
purse with all his money, and bid her tell every thing about you, Madam;
how you had behaved, and what you had said. So she told him, crying all
the while, for she repented from her heart that ever she consented to
have any hand in the business. And sometimes he would start away and
gnash his teeth, and dash his head against the wall; and sometimes he
would bid her go on, that he might run distracted at once and forget
all. So she told him that you had written to one Mrs Douglas, in hopes
that when you were dead he would take pity on you, (repeating your very
words, Madam). Then he asked to see the letter, and he carried it into
your room. And there we heard him groaning and speaking to himself, and
throwing himself against the walls; and we thought it best to let him
come to himself a little and not disturb him. So by and by he called for
pen and ink, and I carried them to him, thinking if he wanted to write
it was a sign he was growing more calm. Then he continued writing for
some time, though now and again we heard him restless as before. At last
he opened the door, and called me, "Robert," says he, quite calm and
composed like, "if you deliver this packet as directed, you will earn
three hundred pounds. But be sure to deliver it with your own hand." I
was going to ask him something more about it, for I did not just know
what he meant about the £300; but he pushed me out, and shut himself
into the room. Then I bethought myself that there was something strange
like in his look, and that he was pale, and somehow not like himself. So
I went to the kitchen to consult with the rest what we had best do. So I
had scarcely got there when I heard a pistol go off, and we all ran and
burst open the door, and there we saw my master, Madam, laid out upon
Miss Montreville's bed, and the pistol still in his hand; though he was
stone dead, Madam, for I suppose the ball had gone right through his
heart.'

Laura, dreadfully shocked, and no longer able to listen to this horrible
relation, hastened out of the room, leaving Mrs Douglas to hear what yet
remained to be told of the history of a man of pleasure!!! The servant
proceeded to tell that he and his companions had conveyed their master's
body to head-quarters, had seen it buried with military honours, and
then had sailed in the first ship for Britain. That remembering the
charge to deliver the packet with his own hand, he had come down to
Scotland on purpose to execute his trust; and hoped that Mrs Douglas
would fulfil his master's promise. He then delivered the packet, which
Mrs Douglas opening in his presence, found to contain a bill for £300 in
favour of Robert Lewson, not payable without her signature; the two
letters which Laura had written during her exile; and the following
lines, rendered almost illegible by the convulsive startings of the hand
which traced them.

     'The angel whom I have murdered, was an angel still. "The
     destroyer came," but found her not. It was her last wish that
     you should know her innocence. None can attest it like me. She
     was purer than heaven's own light. She loved you. There is
     another, too, whom she protests that she loved to the last--but
     it was me alone whom she loved with passion. In the anguish of
     her soul she called it "idolatry;" and the words of agony are
     true. But I, like a base fool, cast her love away for the
     heartless toyings of a wanton! And shall I, who might have been
     so blest, live now to bear the gnawings of this viper--this
     hell never to be escaped?

     'She has said that she must go to the grave laden with shame;
     that her name is degraded through me. Once more, then, I charge
     you, proclaim her innocence. Let no envious tongue presume to
     stain that name. Let it be accounted holy. I will save what she
     loved better than life, though I have persecuted her--driven
     her to death--forced her to hide in the cold waters all that
     was loveliest in woman. She says that she will meet you in
     heaven,--and it must be true, for falsehood was a stranger to
     her lips. Then tell her that he who was her murderer, was her
     avenger too. It is said that self-destruction is the
     last--worst crime. In others it may be so. In me it is but
     justice; for every law condemns the murderer to die. He who
     destroyed that angel should die a thousand deaths. Justice
     shall be speedy.

                              'VILLIERS HARGRAVE.'

Mrs Douglas had no sooner read the contents of her packet, than she
hastened to communicate them to Laura. The horror inspired by Hargrave's
letter, and the dreadful destiny of the writer, did not render her
insensible to the pleasure of being empowered to clear, beyond a doubt,
the fame of her young friend. Laura was, however, for the present, in no
state to share her joy. She could only weep; and, trembling, pray that
she might be enabled to guard against the first beginnings of that
self-indulgence, whose end is destruction!

Mrs Douglas at last found means to rouse her by naming De Courcy, and
reminding her of his right to immediate information of this happy change
in her situation. Laura, as superior to coquetry as to any other species
of despicable cruelty, instantly sat down to communicate the news to her
lover. To her plain unvarnished tale, she added copies of the letters
which attested her innocence, with Lewson's account of the names and
addresses of those persons who had been employed to carry her from
England.

Evening was drawing on before Laura had finished her task; and, desirous
to recruit her spirits before she joined the family circle, she stole
abroad to breathe the reviving air of her native hills. She had crossed
the little lawn, and was opening the gate, when, seeing a carriage drive
quickly up, she drew back. The carriage stopped. She heard an
exclamation of joy, and the next moment she was pressed to the heart of
De Courcy.

Laura first recovered utterance. 'What happy chance,' she cried, 'has
brought you here just at the moment when I am permitted to rejoice that
you are come?' 'Ah, Laura,' said De Courcy, 'could I know that you were
alive and in Britain, yet make no effort to find you? I was convinced
that Mrs Douglas must know your retreat. I was sure that I could plead
so that no human heart could resist my entreaties. And now I have found
thee, I will never leave thee but with life.'

The little shrubbery walk which led round the lawn to the parsonage was
not half a quarter of a mile in length, yet it was an hour before the
lovers reached the house; and before Laura presented De Courcy to her
friends she had promised that in one week she would reward his tried
affection; and had settled, that after they had spent a few days in
delightful solitude at Glenalbert, she would accompany him to Norwood.

       *       *       *       *       *

Laura has now been for some years a wife; and the same qualities which
made her youth respectable, endear her to the happy partner of her
maturer life. She still finds daily exercise for her characteristic
virtue; since even amidst the purest worldly bliss self-denial is
necessary. But the tranquil current of domestic happiness affords no
materials for narrative. The joys that spring from chastened affection,
tempered desires, useful employment, and devout meditation, must be
felt--they cannot be described.

       *       *       *       *       *

