The Fortunes & Misfortunes of the Famous Moll Flanders &c.

Who was Born in Newgate, and during a Life of continu'd Variety for
Threescore Years, besides her Childhood, was Twelve Year a Whore, five
times a Wife (whereof once to her own Brother), Twelve Year a Thief,
Eight Year a Transported Felon in Virginia, at last grew Rich, liv'd
Honest, and dies a Penitent.  Written from her own Memorandums . . .

by Daniel Defoe




THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE

The world is so taken up of late with novels and romances, that it will
be hard for a private history to be taken for genuine, where the names
and other circumstances of the person are concealed, and on this
account we must be content to leave the reader to pass his own opinion
upon the ensuing sheet, and take it just as he pleases.

The author is here supposed to be writing her own history, and in the
very beginning of her account she gives the reasons why she thinks fit
to conceal her true name, after which there is no occasion to say any
more about that.

It is true that the original of this story is put into new words, and
the style of the famous lady we here speak of is a little altered;
particularly she is made to tell her own tale in modester words that
she told it at first, the copy which came first to hand having been
written in language more like one still in Newgate than one grown
penitent and humble, as she afterwards pretends to be.

The pen employed in finishing her story, and making it what you now see
it to be, has had no little difficulty to put it into a dress fit to be
seen, and to make it speak language fit to be read.  When a woman
debauched from her youth, nay, even being the offspring of debauchery
and vice, comes to give an account of all her vicious practices, and
even to descend to the particular occasions and circumstances by which
she ran through in threescore years, an author must be hard put to it
wrap it up so clean as not to give room, especially for vicious
readers, to turn it to his disadvantage.

All possible care, however, has been taken to give no lewd ideas, no
immodest turns in the new dressing up of this story; no, not to the
worst parts of  her expressions.  To this purpose some of the vicious
part of her life, which could not be modestly told, is quite left out,
and several other parts are very much shortened.  What is left 'tis
hoped will not offend the chastest reader or the modest hearer; and as
the best use is made even of the worst story, the moral 'tis hoped will
keep the reader serious, even where the story might incline him to be
otherwise.  To give the history of a wicked life repented of,
necessarily requires that the wicked part should be make as wicked as
the real history of it will bear, to illustrate and give a beauty to
the penitent part, which is certainly the best and brightest, if
related with equal spirit and life.

It is suggested there cannot be the same life, the same brightness and
beauty, in relating the penitent part as is in the criminal part.  If
there is any truth in that suggestion, I must be allowed to say 'tis
because there is not the same taste and relish in the reading, and
indeed it is too true that the difference lies not in the real worth of
the subject so much as in the gust and palate of the reader.

But as this work is chiefly recommended to those who know how to read
it, and how to make the good uses of it which the story all along
recommends to them, so it is to be hoped that such readers will be more
pleased with the moral than the fable, with the application than with
the relation, and with the end of the writer than with the life of the
person written of.

There is in this story abundance of delightful incidents, and all of
them usefully applied.  There is an agreeable turn artfully given them
in the relating, that naturally instructs the reader, either one way or
other.  The first part of her lewd life with the young gentleman at
Colchester has so many happy turns given it to expose the crime, and
warn all whose circumstances are adapted to it, of the ruinous end of
such things, and the foolish, thoughtless, and abhorred conduct of both
the parties, that it abundantly atones for all the lively description
she gives of her folly and wickedness.

The repentance of her lover at the Bath, and how brought by the just
alarm of his fit of sickness to abandon her; the just caution given
there against even the lawful intimacies of the dearest friends, and
how unable they are to preserve the most solemn resolutions of virtue
without divine assistance; these are parts which, to a just
discernment, will appear to have more real beauty in them all the
amorous chain of story which introduces it.

In a word, as the whole relation is carefully garbled of all the levity
and looseness that was in it, so it all applied, and with the utmost
care, to virtuous and religious uses.  None can, without being guilty
of manifest injustice, cast any reproach upon it, or upon our design in
publishing it.

The advocates for the stage have, in all ages, made this the great
argument to persuade people that their plays are useful, and that they
ought to be allowed in the most civilised and in the most religious
government; namely, that they are applied to virtuous purposes, and
that by the most lively representations, they fail not to recommend
virtue and generous principles, and to discourage and expose all sorts
of vice and corruption of manners; and were it true that they did so,
and that they constantly adhered to that rule, as the test of their
acting on the theatre, much might be said in their favour.

Throughout the infinite variety of this book, this fundamental is most
strictly adhered to; there is not a wicked action in any part of it,
but is first and last rendered unhappy and unfortunate; there is not a
superlative villain brought upon the stage, but either he is brought to
an unhappy end, or brought to be a penitent; there is not an ill thing
mentioned but it is condemned, even in the relation, nor a virtuous,
just thing but it carries its praise along with it.  What can more
exactly answer the rule laid down, to recommend even those
representations of things which have so many other just objections
leaving against them?  namely, of example, of bad company, obscene
language, and the like.

Upon this foundation this book is recommended to the reader as a work
from every part of which something may be learned, and some just and
religious inference is drawn, by which the reader will have something
of instruction, if he pleases to make use of it.

All the exploits of this lady of fame, in her depredations upon
mankind, stand as so many warnings to honest people to beware of them,
intimating to them by what methods innocent people are drawn in,
plundered and robbed, and by consequence how to avoid them.  Her
robbing a little innocent child, dressed fine by the vanity of the
mother, to go to the dancing-school, is a good memento to such people
hereafter, as is likewise her picking the gold watch from the young
lady's side in the Park.

Her getting a parcel from a hare-brained wench at the coaches in St.
John Street; her booty made at the fire, and again at Harwich, all give
us excellent warnings in such cases to be more present to ourselves in
sudden surprises of every sort.

Her application to a sober life and industrious management at last in
Virginia, with her transported spouse, is a story fruitful of
instruction to all the unfortunate creatures who are obliged to seek
their re-establishment abroad, whether by the misery of transportation
or other disaster; letting them know that diligence and application
have their due encouragement, even in the remotest parts of the world,
and that no case can be so low, so despicable, or so empty of prospect,
but that an unwearied industry will go a great way to deliver us from
it, will in time raise the meanest creature to appear again in the world,
and give him a new case for his life.

There are a few of the serious inferences which we are led by the hand
to in this book, and these are fully sufficient to justify any man in
recommending it to the world, and much more to justify the publication
of it.

There are two of the most beautiful parts still behind, which this
story gives some idea of, and lets us into the parts of them, but they
are either of them too long to be brought into the same volume, and
indeed are, as I may call them, whole volumes of themselves, viz.: 1.
The life of her governess, as she calls her, who had run through, it
seems, in a few years, all the eminent degrees of a gentlewoman, a
whore, and a bawd; a midwife and a midwife-keeper, as they are called;
a pawnbroker, a childtaker, a receiver of thieves, and of thieves'
purchase, that is to say, of stolen goods; and in a word, herself a
thief, a breeder up of thieves and the like, and yet at last a penitent.

The second is the life of her transported husband, a highwayman, who it
seems, lived a twelve years' life of successful villainy upon the road,
and even at last came off so well as to be a volunteer transport, not a
convict; and in whose life there is an incredible variety.

But, as I have said, these are things too long to bring in here, so
neither can I make a promise of the coming out by themselves.

We cannot say, indeed, that this history is carried on quite to the end
of the life of this famous Moll Flanders, as she calls herself, for
nobody can write their own life to the full end of it, unless they can
write it after they are dead.  But her husband's life, being written by
a third hand, gives a full account of them both, how long they lived
together in that country, and how they both came to England again,
after about eight years, in which time they were grown very rich, and
where she lived, it seems, to be very old, but was not so extraordinary
a penitent as she was at first; it seems only that indeed she always
spoke with abhorrence of her former life, and of every part of it.

In her last scene, at Maryland and Virginia, many pleasant things
happened, which makes that part of her life very agreeable, but they
are not told with the same elegancy as those accounted for by herself;
so it is still to the more advantage that we break off here.



MOLL FLANDERS

My true name is so well known in the records or registers at Newgate,
and in the Old Bailey, and there are some things of such consequence
still depending there, relating to my particular conduct, that it is
not be expected I should set my name or the account of my family to
this work; perhaps, after my death, it may be better known; at present
it would not be proper, nor not though a general pardon should be
issued, even without exceptions and reserve of persons or crimes.

It is enough to tell you, that as some of my worst comrades, who are
out of the way of doing me harm (having gone out of the world by the
steps and the string, as I often expected to go), knew me by the name
of Moll Flanders, so you may give me leave to speak of myself under
that name till I dare own who I have been, as well as who I am.

I have been told that in one of neighbour nations, whether it be in
France or where else I know not, they have an order from the king, that
when any criminal is condemned, either to die, or to the galleys, or to
be transported, if they leave any children, as such are generally
unprovided for, by the poverty or forfeiture of their parents, so they
are immediately taken into the care of the Government, and put into a
hospital called the House of Orphans, where they are bred up, clothed,
fed, taught, and when fit to go out, are placed out to trades or to
services, so as to be well able to provide for themselves by an honest,
industrious behaviour.

Had this been the custom in our country, I had not been left a poor
desolate girl without friends, without clothes, without help or helper
in the world, as was my fate; and by which I was not only exposed to
very great distresses, even before I was capable either of
understanding my case or how to amend it, but brought into a course of
life which was not only scandalous in itself, but which in its ordinary
course tended to the swift destruction both of soul and body.

But the case was otherwise here.  My mother was convicted of felony for
a certain petty theft scarce worth naming, viz.  having an opportunity
of borrowing three pieces of fine holland of a certain draper in
Cheapside.  The circumstances are too long to repeat, and I have heard
them related so many ways, that I can scarce be certain which is the
right account.

However it was, this they all agree in, that my mother pleaded her
belly, and being found quick with child, she was respited for about
seven months; in which time having brought me into the world, and being
about again, she was called down, as they term it, to her former
judgment, but obtained the favour of being transported to the
plantations, and left me about half a year old; and in bad hands, you
may be sure.

This is too near the first hours of my life for me to relate anything
of myself but by hearsay; it is enough to mention, that as I was born
in such an unhappy place, I had no parish to have recourse to for my
nourishment in my infancy; nor can I give the least account how I was
kept alive, other than that, as I have been told, some relation of my
mother's took me away for a while as a nurse, but at whose expense, or
by whose direction, I know nothing at all of it.

The first account that I can recollect, or could ever learn of myself,
was that I had wandered among a crew of those people they call gypsies,
or Egyptians; but I believe it was but a very little while that I had
been among them, for I had not had my skin discoloured or blackened, as
they do very young to all the children they carry about with them; nor
can I tell how I came among them, or how I got from them.

It was at Colchester, in Essex, that those people left me; and I have a
notion in my head that I left them there (that is, that I hid myself
and would not go any farther with them), but I am not able to be
particular in that account; only this I remember, that being taken up
by some of the parish officers of Colchester, I gave an account that I
came into the town with the gypsies, but that I would not go any
farther with them, and that so they had left me, but whither they were
gone that I knew not, nor could they expect it of me; for though they
send round the country to inquire after them, it seems they could not
be found.

I was now in a way to be provided for; for though I was not a parish
charge upon this or that part of the town by law, yet as my case came
to be known, and that I was too young to do any work, being not above
three years old, compassion moved the magistrates of the town to order
some care to be taken of me, and I became one of their own as much as
if I had been born in the place.

In the provision they made for me, it was my good hap to be put to
nurse, as they call it, to a woman who was indeed poor but had been in
better circumstances, and who got a little livelihood by taking such as
I was supposed to be, and keeping them with all necessaries, till they
were at a certain age, in which it might be supposed they might go to
service or get their own bread.

This woman had also had a little school, which she kept to teach
children to read and to work; and having, as I have said, lived before
that in good fashion, she bred up the children she took with a great
deal of art, as well as with a great deal of care.

But that which was worth all the rest, she bred them up very
religiously, being herself a very sober, pious woman, very house-wifely
and clean, and very mannerly, and with good behaviour.  So that in a
word, expecting a plain diet, coarse lodging, and mean clothes, we were
brought up as mannerly and as genteelly as if we had been at the
dancing-school.

I was continued here till I was eight years old, when I was terrified
with news that the magistrates (as I think they called them) had
ordered that I should go to service.  I was able to do but very little
service wherever I was to go, except it was to run of errands and be a
drudge to some cookmaid, and this they told me of often, which put me
into a great fright; for I had a thorough aversion to going to service,
as they called it (that is, to be a servant), though I was so young;
and I told my nurse, as we called her, that I believed I could get my
living without going to service, if she pleased to let me; for she had
taught me to work with my needle, and spin worsted, which is the chief
trade of that city, and I told her that if she would keep me, I would
work for her, and I would work very hard.

I talked to her almost every day of working hard; and, in short, I did
nothing but work and cry all day, which grieved the good, kind woman so
much, that at last she began to be concerned for me, for she loved me
very well.

One day after this, as she came into the room where all we poor
children were at work, she sat down just over against me, not in her
usual place as mistress, but as if she set herself on purpose to
observe me and see me work.  I was doing something she had set me to;
as I remember, it was marking some shirts which she had taken to make,
and after a while she began to talk to me.  'Thou foolish child,' says
she, 'thou art always crying (for I was crying then); 'prithee, what
dost cry for?' 'Because they will take me away,' says I, 'and put me to
service, and I can't work housework.'  'Well, child,' says she, 'but
though you can't work housework, as you call it, you will learn it in
time, and they won't put you to hard things at first.'  'Yes, they
will,' says I, 'and if I can't do it they will beat me, and the maids
will beat me to make me do great work, and I am but a little girl and I
can't do it'; and then I cried again, till I could not speak any more
to her.

This moved my good motherly nurse, so that she from that time resolved
I should not go to service yet; so she bid me not cry, and she would
speak to Mr. Mayor, and I should not go to service till I was bigger.

Well, this did not satisfy me, for to think of going to service was
such a frightful thing to me, that if she had assured me I should not
have gone till I was twenty years old, it would have been the same to
me; I should have cried, I believe, all the time, with the very
apprehension of its being to be so at last.

When she saw that I was not pacified yet, she began to be angry with
me.  'And what would you have?' says she; 'don't I tell you that you
shall not go to service till your are bigger?' 'Ay,' said I, 'but then
I must go at last.'  'Why, what?' said she; 'is the girl mad?  What
would you be--a gentlewoman?' 'Yes,' says I, and cried heartily till I
roared out again.

This set the old gentlewoman a-laughing at me, as you may be sure it
would.  'Well, madam, forsooth,' says she, gibing at me, 'you would be
a gentlewoman; and pray how will you come to be a gentlewoman?  What!
will you do it by your fingers' end?'

'Yes,' says I again, very innocently.

'Why, what can you earn?' says she; 'what can you get at your work?'

'Threepence,' said I, 'when I spin, and fourpence when I work plain
work.'

'Alas! poor gentlewoman,' said she again, laughing, 'what will that do
for thee?'

'It will keep me,' says I, 'if you will let me live with you.'  And
this I said in such a poor petitioning tone, that it made the poor
woman's heart yearn to me, as she told me afterwards.

'But,' says she, 'that will not keep you and buy you clothes too; and
who must buy the little gentlewoman clothes?' says she, and smiled all
the while at me.

'I will work harder, then,' says I, 'and you shall have it all.'

'Poor child! it won't keep you,' says she; 'it will hardly keep you in
victuals.'

'Then I will have no victuals,' says I, again very innocently; 'let me
but live with you.'

'Why, can you live without victuals?' says she.

'Yes,' again says I, very much like a child, you may be sure, and still
I cried heartily.

I had no policy in all this; you may easily see it was all nature; but
it was joined with so much innocence and so much passion that, in
short, it set the good motherly creature a-weeping too, and she cried
at last as fast as I did, and then took me and led me out of the
teaching-room.  'Come,' says she, 'you shan't go to service; you shall
live with me'; and this pacified me for the present.

Some time after this, she going to wait on the Mayor, and talking of
such things as belonged to her business, at last my story came up, and
my good nurse told Mr. Mayor the whole tale.  He was so pleased with
it, that he would call his lady and his two daughters to hear it, and
it made mirth enough among them, you may be sure.

However, not a week had passed over, but on a sudden comes Mrs.
Mayoress and her two daughters to the house to see my old nurse, and to
see her school and the children.  When they had looked about them a
little, 'Well, Mrs. ----,' says the Mayoress to my nurse, 'and pray
which is the little lass that intends to be a gentlewoman?'  I heard
her, and I was terribly frighted at first, though I did not know why
neither; but Mrs. Mayoress comes up to me.  'Well, miss,' says she,
'and what are you at work upon?'  The word miss was a language that had
hardly been heard of in our school, and I wondered what sad name it was
she called me.  However, I stood up, made a curtsy, and she took my
work out of my hand, looked on it, and said it was very well; then she
took up one of the hands.  'Nay,' says she, 'the child may come to be a
gentlewoman for aught anybody knows; she has a gentlewoman's hand,'
says she.  This pleased me mightily, you may be sure; but Mrs. Mayoress
did not stop there, but giving me my work again, she put her hand in
her pocket, gave me a shilling, and bid me mind my work, and learn to
work well, and I might be a gentlewoman for aught she knew.

Now all this while my good old nurse, Mrs. Mayoress, and all the rest
of them did not understand me at all, for they meant one sort of thing
by the word gentlewoman, and I meant quite another; for alas! all I
understood by being a gentlewoman was to be able to work for myself,
and get enough to keep me without that terrible bugbear going to
service, whereas they meant to live great, rich and high, and I know
not what.

Well, after Mrs. Mayoress was gone, her two daughters came in, and they
called for the gentlewoman too, and they talked a long while to me, and
I answered them in my innocent way; but always, if they asked me
whether I resolved to be a gentlewoman, I answered Yes.  At last one of
them asked me what a gentlewoman was?  That puzzled me much; but,
however, I explained myself negatively, that it was one that did not go
to service, to do housework.  They were pleased to be familiar with me,
and like my little prattle to them, which, it seems, was agreeable
enough to them, and they gave me money too.

As for my money, I gave it all to my mistress-nurse, as I called her,
and told her she should have all I got for myself when I was a
gentlewoman, as well as now.  By this and some other of my talk, my old
tutoress began to understand me about what I meant by being a
gentlewoman, and that I understood by it no more than to be able to get
my bread by my own work; and at last she asked me whether it was not so.

I told her, yes, and insisted on it, that to do so was to be a
gentlewoman; 'for,' says I, 'there is such a one,' naming a woman that
mended lace and washed the ladies' laced-heads; 'she,' says I, 'is a
gentlewoman, and they call her madam.'

'Poor child,' says my good old nurse, 'you may soon be such a
gentlewoman as that, for she is a person of ill fame, and has had two
or three bastards.'

I did not understand anything of that; but I answered, 'I am sure they
call her madam, and she does not go to service nor do housework'; and
therefore I insisted that she was a gentlewoman, and I would be such a
gentlewoman as that.

The ladies were told all this again, to be sure, and they made
themselves merry with it, and every now and then the young ladies, Mr.
Mayor's daughters, would come and see me, and ask where the little
gentlewoman was, which made me not a little proud of myself.

This held a great while, and I was often visited by these young ladies,
and sometimes they brought others with them; so that I was known by it
almost all over the town.

I was now about ten years old, and began to look a little womanish, for
I was mighty grave and humble, very mannerly, and as I had often heard
the ladies say I was pretty, and would be a very handsome woman, so you
may be sure that hearing them say so made me not a little proud.
However, that pride had no ill effect upon me yet; only, as they often
gave me money, and I gave it to my old nurse, she, honest woman, was so
just to me as to lay it all out again for me, and gave me head-dresses,
and linen, and gloves, and ribbons, and I went very neat, and always
clean; for that I would do, and if I had rags on, I would always be
clean, or else I would dabble them in water myself; but, I say, my good
nurse, when I had money given me, very honestly laid it out for me, and
would always tell the ladies this or that was bought with their money;
and this made them oftentimes give me more, till at last I was indeed
called upon by the magistrates, as I understood it, to go out to
service; but then I was come to be so good a workwoman myself, and the
ladies were so kind to me, that it was plain I could maintain
myself--that is to say, I could earn as much for my nurse as she was
able by it to keep me--so she told them that if they would give her
leave, she would keep the gentlewoman, as she called me, to be her
assistant and teach the children, which I was very well able to do; for
I was very nimble at my work, and had a good hand with my needle,
though I was yet very young.

But the kindness of the ladies of the town did not end here, for when
they came to understand that I was no more maintained by the public
allowance as before, they gave me money oftener than formerly; and as I
grew up they brought me work to do for them, such as linen to make, and
laces to mend, and heads to dress up, and not only paid me for doing
them, but even taught me how to do them; so that now I was a
gentlewoman indeed, as I understood that word, I not only found myself
clothes and paid my nurse for my keeping, but got money in my pocket
too beforehand.

The ladies also gave me clothes frequently of their own or their
children's; some stockings, some petticoats, some gowns, some one
thing, some another, and these my old woman managed for me like a mere
mother, and kept them for me, obliged me to mend them, and turn them
and twist them to the best advantage, for she was a rare housewife.

At last one of the ladies took so much fancy to me that she would have
me home to her house, for a month, she said, to be among her daughters.

Now, though this was exceeding kind in her, yet, as my old good woman
said to her, unless she resolved to keep me for good and all, she would
do the little gentlewoman more harm than good.  'Well,' says the lady,
'that's true; and therefore I'll only take her home for a week, then,
that I may see how my daughters and she agree together, and how I like
her temper, and then I'll tell you more; and in the meantime, if
anybody comes to see her as they used to do, you may only tell them you
have sent her out to my house.'

This was prudently managed enough, and I went to the lady's house; but
I was so pleased there with the young ladies, and they so pleased with
me, that I had enough to do to come away, and they were as unwilling to
part with me.

However, I did come away, and lived almost a year more with my honest
old woman, and began now to be very helpful to her; for I was almost
fourteen years old, was tall of my age, and looked a little womanish;
but I had such a taste of genteel living at the lady's house that I was
not so easy in my old quarters as I used to be, and I thought it was
fine to be a gentlewoman indeed, for I had quite other notions of a
gentlewoman now than I had before; and as I thought, I say, that it was
fine to be a gentlewoman, so I loved to be among gentlewomen, and
therefore I longed to be there again.

About the time that I was fourteen years and a quarter old, my good
nurse, mother I rather to call her, fell sick and died.  I was then in
a sad condition indeed, for as there is no great bustle in putting an
end to a poor body's family when once they are carried to the grave, so
the poor good woman being buried, the parish children she kept were
immediately removed by the church-wardens; the school was at an end,
and the children of it had no more to do but just stay at home till
they were sent somewhere else; and as for what she left, her daughter,
a married woman with six or seven children, came and swept it all away
at once, and removing the goods, they had no more to say to me than to
jest with me, and tell me that the little gentlewoman might set up for
herself if she pleased.

I was frighted out of my wits almost, and knew not what to do, for I
was, as it were, turned out of doors to the wide world, and that which
was still worse, the old honest woman had two-and-twenty shillings of
mine in her hand, which was all the estate the little gentlewoman had
in the world; and when I asked the daughter for it, she huffed me and
laughed at me, and told me she had nothing to do with it.

It was true the good, poor woman had told her daughter of it, and that
it lay in such a place, that it was the child's money, and  had called
once or twice for me to give it me, but I was, unhappily, out of the
way somewhere or other, and when I came back she was past being in a
condition to speak of it.  However, the daughter was so honest
afterwards as to give it me, though at first she used me cruelly about
it.

Now was I a poor gentlewoman indeed, and I was just that very night to
be turned into the wide world; for the daughter removed all the goods,
and I had not so much as a lodging to go to, or a bit of bread to eat.
But it seems some of the neighbours, who had known my circumstances,
took so much compassion of me as to acquaint the lady in whose family I
had been a week, as I mentioned above; and immediately she sent her
maid to fetch me away, and two of her daughters came with the maid
though unsent.  So I went with them, bag and baggage, and with a glad
heart, you may be sure.  The fright of my condition had made such an
impression upon me, that I did not want now to be a gentlewoman, but
was very willing to be a servant, and that any kind of servant they
thought fit to have me be.

But my new generous mistress, for she exceeded the good woman I was
with before, in everything, as well as in the matter of estate; I say,
in everything except honesty; and for that, though this was a lady most
exactly just, yet I must not forget to say on all occasions, that the
first, though poor, was as uprightly honest as it was possible for any
one to be.

I was no sooner carried away, as I have said, by this good gentlewoman,
but the first lady, that is to say, the Mayoress that was, sent her two
daughters to take care of me; and another family which had taken notice
of me when I was the little gentlewoman, and had given me work to do,
sent for me after her, so that I was mightily made of, as we say; nay,
and they were not a little angry, especially madam the Mayoress, that
her friend had taken me away from her, as she called it; for, as she
said, I was hers by right, she having been the first that took any
notice of me.  But they that had me would not part with me; and as for
me, though I should have been very well treated with any of the others,
yet I could not be better than where I was.

Here I continued till I was between seventeen and eighteen years old,
and here I had all the advantages for my education that could be
imagined; the lady had masters home to the house to teach her daughters
to dance, and to speak French, and to write, and other to teach them
music; and I was always with them, I learned as fast as they; and
though the masters were not appointed to teach me, yet I learned by
imitation and inquiry all that they learned by instruction and
direction; so that, in short, I learned to dance and speak French as
well as any of them, and to sing much better, for I had a better voice
than any of them.  I could not so readily come at playing on the
harpsichord or spinet, because I had no instrument of my own to
practice on, and could only come at theirs in the intervals when they
left it, which was uncertain; but yet I learned tolerably well too, and
the young ladies at length got two instruments, that is to say, a
harpsichord and a spinet too, and then they taught me themselves.  But
as to dancing, they could hardly help my learning country-dances,
because they always wanted me to make up even number; and, on the other
hand, they were as heartily willing to learn me everything that they
had been taught themselves, as I could be to take the learning.

By this means I had, as I have said above, all the advantages of
education that I could have had if I had been as much a gentlewoman as
they were with whom I lived; and in some things I had the advantage of
my ladies, though they were my superiors; but they were all the gifts
of nature, and which all their fortunes could not furnish.  First, I
was apparently handsomer than any of them; secondly, I was better
shaped; and, thirdly, I sang better, by which I mean I had a better
voice; in all which you will, I hope, allow me to say, I do not speak
my own conceit of myself, but the opinion of all that knew the family.

I had with all these the common vanity of my sex, viz. that being
really taken for very handsome, or, if you please, for a great beauty,
I very well knew it, and had as good an opinion of myself as anybody
else could have of me; and particularly I loved to hear anybody speak
of it, which could not but happen to me sometimes, and was a great
satisfaction to me.

Thus far I have had a smooth story to tell of myself, and in all this
part of my life I not only had the reputation of living in a very good
family, and a family noted and respected everywhere for virtue and
sobriety, and for every valuable thing; but I had the character too of
a very sober, modest, and virtuous young woman, and such I had always
been; neither had I yet any occasion to think of anything else, or to
know what a temptation to wickedness meant.

But that which I was too vain of was my ruin, or rather my vanity was
the cause of it.  The lady in the house where I was had two sons, young
gentlemen of very promising parts and of extraordinary behaviour, and
it was my misfortune to be very well with them both, but they managed
themselves with me in a quite different manner.

The eldest, a gay gentleman that knew the town as well as the country,
and though he had levity enough to do an ill-natured thing, yet had too
much judgment of things to pay too dear for his pleasures; he began
with the unhappy snare to all women, viz. taking notice upon all
occasions how pretty I was, as he called it, how agreeable, how
well-carriaged, and the like; and this he contrived so subtly, as if he
had known as well how to catch a woman in his net as a partridge when
he went a-setting; for he would contrive to be talking this to his
sisters when, though I was not by, yet when he knew I was not far off
but that I should be sure to hear him.  His sisters would return softly
to him, 'Hush, brother, she will hear you; she is but in the next
room.'  Then he would put it off and talk softlier, as if he had not
known it, and begin to acknowledge he was wrong; and then, as if he had
forgot himself, he would speak aloud again, and I, that was so well
pleased to hear it, was sure to listen for it upon all occasions.

After he had thus baited his hook, and found easily enough the method
how to lay it in my way, he played an opener game; and one day, going
by his sister's chamber when I was there, doing something about
dressing her, he comes in with an air of gaiety.  'Oh, Mrs. Betty,'
said he to me, 'how do you do, Mrs. Betty?  Don't your cheeks burn,
Mrs. Betty?'  I made a curtsy and blushed, but said nothing.  'What
makes you talk so, brother?' says the lady.  'Why,' says he, 'we have
been talking of her below-stairs this half-hour.'  'Well,' says his
sister, 'you can say no harm of her, that I am sure, so 'tis no matter
what you have been talking about.' 'Nay,' says he, ''tis so far from
talking harm of her, that we have been talking a great deal of good,
and a great many fine things have been said of Mrs. Betty, I assure
you; and particularly, that she is the handsomest young woman in
Colchester; and, in short, they begin to toast her health in the town.'

'I wonder at you, brother,' says the sister.  'Betty wants but one
thing, but she had as good want everything, for the market is against
our sex just now; and if a young woman have beauty, birth, breeding,
wit, sense, manners, modesty, and all these to an extreme, yet if she
have not money, she's nobody, she had as good want them all for nothing
but money now recommends a woman; the men play the game all into their
own hands.'

Her younger brother, who was by, cried, 'Hold, sister, you run too
fast; I am an exception to your rule.  I assure you, if I find a woman
so accomplished as you talk of, I say, I assure you, I would not
trouble myself about the money.'

'Oh,' says the sister, 'but you will take care not to fancy one, then,
without the money.'

'You don't know that neither,' says the brother.

'But why, sister,' says the elder brother, 'why do you exclaim so at
the men for aiming so much at the fortune?  You are none of them that
want a fortune, whatever else you want.'

'I understand you, brother,' replies the lady very smartly; 'you
suppose I have the money, and want the beauty; but as times go now, the
first will do without the last, so I have the better of my neighbours.'

'Well,' says the younger brother, 'but your neighbours, as you call
them, may be even with you, for beauty will steal a husband sometimes
in spite of money, and when the maid chances to be handsomer than the
mistress, she oftentimes makes as good a market, and rides in a coach
before her.'

I thought it was time for me to withdraw and leave them, and I did so,
but not so far but that I heard all their discourse, in which I heard
abundance of the fine things said of myself, which served to prompt my
vanity, but, as I soon found, was not the way to increase my interest
in the family, for the sister and the younger brother fell grievously
out about it; and as he said some very disobliging things to her upon
my account, so I could easily see that she resented them by her future
conduct to me, which indeed was very unjust to me, for I had never had
the least thought of what she suspected as to her younger brother;
indeed, the elder brother, in his distant, remote way, had said a great
many things as in jest, which I had the folly to believe were in
earnest, or to flatter myself with the hopes of what I ought to have
supposed he never intended, and perhaps never thought of.

It happened one day that he came running upstairs, towards the room
where his sisters used to sit and work, as he often used to do; and
calling to them before he came in, as was his way too, I, being there
alone, stepped to the door, and said, 'Sir, the ladies are not here,
they are walked down the garden.' As I stepped forward to say this,
towards the door, he was just got to the door, and clasping me in his
arms, as if it had been by chance, 'Oh, Mrs. Betty,' says he, 'are you
here?  That's better still; I want to speak with you more than I do
with them'; and then, having me in his arms, he kissed me three or four
times.

I struggled to get away, and yet did it but faintly neither, and he
held me fast, and still kissed me, till he was almost out of breath,
and then, sitting down, says, 'Dear Betty, I am in love with you.'

His words, I must confess, fired my blood; all my spirits flew about my
heart and put me into disorder enough, which he might easily have seen
in my face.  He repeated it afterwards several times, that he was in
love with me, and my heart spoke as plain as a voice, that I liked it;
nay, whenever he said, 'I am in love with you,' my blushes plainly
replied, 'Would you were, sir.'

However, nothing else passed at that time; it was but a surprise, and
when he was gone I soon recovered myself again.  He had stayed longer
with me, but he happened to look out at the window and see his sisters
coming up the garden, so he took his leave, kissed me again, told me he
was very serious, and I should hear more of him very quickly, and away
he went, leaving me infinitely pleased, though surprised; and had there
not been one misfortune in it, I had been in the right, but the mistake
lay here, that Mrs. Betty was in earnest and the gentleman was not.

From this time my head ran upon strange things, and I may truly say I
was not myself; to have such a gentleman talk to me of being in love
with me, and of my being such a charming creature, as he told me I was;
these were things I knew not how to bear, my vanity was elevated to the
last degree.  It is true I had my head full of pride, but, knowing
nothing of the wickedness of the times, I had not one thought of my own
safety or of my virtue about me; and had my young master offered it at
first sight, he might have taken any liberty he thought fit with me;
but he did not see his advantage, which was my happiness for that time.

After this attack it was not long but he found an opportunity to catch
me again, and almost in the same posture; indeed, it had more of design
in it on his part, though not on my part.  It was thus:  the young
ladies were all gone a-visiting with their mother; his brother was out
of town; and as for his father, he had been in London for a week
before.  He had so well watched me that he knew where I was, though I
did not so much as know that he was in the house; and he briskly comes
up the stairs and, seeing me at work, comes into the room to me
directly, and began just as he did before, with taking me in his arms,
and kissing me for almost a quarter of an hour together.

It was his younger sister's chamber that I was in, and as there was
nobody in the house but the maids below-stairs, he was, it may be, the
ruder; in short, he began to be in earnest with me indeed.  Perhaps he
found me a little too easy, for God knows I made no resistance to him
while he only held me in his arms and kissed me; indeed, I was too well
pleased with it to resist him much.

However, as it were, tired with that kind of work, we sat down, and
there he talked with me a great while; he said he was charmed with me,
and that he could not rest night or day till he had told me how he was
in love with me, and, if I was able to love him again, and would make
him happy, I should be the saving of his life, and many such fine
things.  I said little to him again, but easily discovered that I was a
fool, and that I did not in the least perceive what he meant.

Then he walked about the room, and taking me by the hand, I walked with
him; and by and by, taking his advantage, he threw me down upon the
bed, and kissed me there most violently; but, to give him his due,
offered no manner of rudeness to me, only kissed a great while.  After
this he thought he had heard somebody come upstairs, so got off from
the bed, lifted me up, professing a great deal of love for me, but told
me it was all an honest affection, and that he meant no ill to me; and
with that he put five guineas into my hand, and went away downstairs.

I was more confounded with the money than I was before with the love,
and began to be so elevated that I scarce knew the ground I stood on.
I am the more particular in this part, that if my story comes to be
read by any innocent young body, they may learn from it to guard
themselves against the mischiefs which attend an early knowledge of
their own beauty.  If a young woman once thinks herself handsome, she
never doubts the truth of any man that tells her he is in love with
her; for if she believes herself charming enough to captivate him, 'tis
natural to expect the effects of it.

This young gentleman had fired his inclination as much as he had my
vanity, and, as if he had found that he had an opportunity and was
sorry he did not take hold of it, he comes up again in half an hour or
thereabouts, and falls to work with me again as before, only with a
little less introduction.

And first, when he entered the room, he turned about and shut the door.
'Mrs. Betty,' said he, 'I fancied before somebody was coming upstairs,
but it was not so; however,' adds he, 'if they find me in the room with
you, they shan't catch me a-kissing of you.' I told him I did not know
who should be coming upstairs, for I believed there was nobody in the
house but the cook and the other maid, and they never came up those
stairs.  'Well, my dear,' says he, ''tis good to be sure, however'; and
so he sits down, and we began to talk.  And now, though I was still all
on fire with his first visit, and said little, he did as it were put
words in my mouth, telling me how passionately he loved me, and that
though he could not mention such a thing till he came to this estate,
yet he was resolved to make me happy then, and himself too; that is to
say, to marry me, and abundance of such fine things, which I, poor
fool, did not understand the drift of, but acted as if there was no
such thing as any kind of love but that which tended to matrimony; and
if he had spoke of that, I had no room, as well as no power, to have
said no; but we were not come that length yet.

We had not sat long, but he got up, and, stopping my very breath with
kisses, threw me upon the bed again; but then being both well warmed,
he went farther with me than decency permits me to mention, nor had it
been in my power to have denied him at that moment, had he offered much
more than he did.

However, though he took these freedoms with me, it did not go to that
which they call the last favour, which, to do him justice, he did not
attempt; and he made that self-denial of his a plea for all his
freedoms with me upon other occasions after this.  When this was over,
he stayed but a little while, but he put almost a handful of gold in my
hand, and left me, making a thousand protestations of his passion for
me, and of his loving me above all the women in the world.

It will not be strange if I now began to think, but alas! it was but
with very little solid reflection.  I had a most unbounded stock of
vanity and pride, and but a very little stock of virtue.  I did indeed
case sometimes with myself what young master aimed at, but thought of
nothing but the fine words and the gold; whether he intended to marry
me, or not to marry me, seemed a matter of no great consequence to me;
nor did my thoughts so much as suggest to me the necessity of making
any capitulation for myself, till he came to make a kind of formal
proposal to me, as you shall hear presently.

Thus I gave up myself to a readiness of being ruined without the least
concern and am a fair memento to all young women whose vanity prevails
over their virtue.  Nothing was ever so stupid on both sides.  Had I
acted as became me, and resisted as virtue and honour require, this
gentleman had either desisted his attacks, finding no room to expect
the accomplishment of his design, or had made fair and honourable
proposals of marriage; in which case, whoever had blamed him, nobody
could have blamed me.  In short, if he had known me, and how easy the
trifle he aimed at was to be had, he would have troubled his head no
farther, but have given me four or five guineas, and have lain with me
the next time he had come at me.  And if I had known his thoughts, and
how hard he thought I would be to be gained, I might have made my own
terms with him; and if I had not capitulated for an immediate marriage,
I might for a maintenance till marriage, and might have had what I
would; for he was already rich to excess, besides what he had in
expectation; but I seemed wholly to have abandoned all such thoughts as
these, and was taken up only with the pride of my beauty, and of being
beloved by such a gentleman.  As for the gold, I spent whole hours in
looking upon it; I told the guineas over and over a thousand times a
day.  Never a poor vain creature was so wrapt up with every part of the
story as I was, not considering what was before me, and how near my
ruin was at the door; indeed, I think I rather wished for that ruin
than studied to avoid it.

In the meantime, however, I was cunning enough not to give the least
room to any in the family to suspect me, or to imagine that I had the
least correspondence with this young gentleman.  I scarce ever looked
towards him in public, or answered if he spoke to me when anybody was
near us; but for all that, we had every now and then a little
encounter, where we had room for a word or two, and now and then a kiss,
but no fair opportunity for the mischief intended; and especially
considering that he made more circumlocution than, if he had known my
thoughts, he had occasion for; and the work appearing difficult to him,
he really made it so.

But as the devil is an unwearied tempter, so he never fails to find
opportunity for that wickedness he invites to.  It was one evening that
I was in the garden, with his two younger sisters and himself, and all
very innocently merry, when he found means to convey a note into my
hand, by which he directed me to understand that he would to-morrow
desire me publicly to go of an errand for him into the town, and that I
should see him somewhere by the way.

Accordingly, after dinner, he very gravely says to me, his sisters
being all by, 'Mrs. Betty, I must ask a favour of you.' 'What's that?'
says his second sister.  'Nay, sister,' says he very gravely, 'if you
can't spare Mrs. Betty to-day, any other time will do.'  Yes, they
said, they could spare her well enough, and the sister begged pardon
for asking, which they did but of mere course, without any meaning.
'Well, but, brother,' says the eldest sister, 'you must tell Mrs. Betty
what it is; if it be any private business that we must not hear, you
may call her out.  There she is.'  'Why, sister,' says the gentleman
very gravely, 'what do you mean?  I only desire her to go into the High
Street' (and then he pulls out a turnover), 'to such a shop'; and then
he tells them a long story of two fine neckcloths he had bid money for,
and he wanted to have me go and make an errand to buy a neck to the
turnover that he showed, to see if they would take my money for the
neckcloths; to bid a shilling more, and haggle with them; and then he
made more errands, and so continued to have such petty business to do,
that I should be sure to stay a good while.

When he had given me my errands, he told them a long story of a visit
he was going to make to a family they all knew, and where was to be
such-and-such gentlemen, and how merry they were to be, and very
formally asks his sisters to go with him, and they as formally excused
themselves, because of company that they had notice was to come and
visit them that afternoon; which, by the way, he had contrived on
purpose.

He had scarce done speaking to them, and giving me my errand, but his
man came up to tell him that Sir W---- H----'s coach stopped at the
door; so he runs down, and comes up again immediately.  'Alas!' says he
aloud, 'there's all my mirth spoiled at once; sir W---- has sent his
coach for me, and desires to speak with me upon some earnest business.'
It seems this Sir W---- was a gentleman who lived about three miles out
of town, to whom he had spoken on purpose the day before, to lend him
his chariot for a particular occasion, and had appointed it to call for
him, as it did, about three o'clock.

Immediately he calls for his best wig, hat, and sword, and ordering his
man to go to the other place to make his excuse-- that was to say, he
made an excuse to send his man away--he prepares to go into the coach.
As he was going, he stopped a while, and speaks mighty earnestly to me
about his business, and finds an opportunity to say very softly to me,
'Come away, my dear, as soon as ever you can.'  I said nothing, but
made a curtsy, as if I had done so to what he said in public.  In about
a quarter of an hour I went out too; I had no dress other than before,
except that I had a hood, a mask, a fan, and a pair of gloves in my
pocket; so that there was not the least suspicion in the house.  He
waited for me in the coach in a back-lane, which he knew I must pass
by, and had directed the coachman whither to go, which was to a certain
place, called Mile End, where lived a confidant of his, where we went
in, and where was all the convenience in the world to be as wicked as
we pleased.

When we were together he began to talk very gravely to me, and to tell
me he did not bring me there to betray me; that his passion for me
would not suffer him to abuse me; that he resolved to marry me as soon
as he came to his estate; that in the meantime, if I would grant his
request, he would maintain me very honourably; and made me a thousand
protestations of his sincerity and of his affection to me; and that he
would never abandon me, and as I may say, made a thousand more
preambles than he need to have done.

However, as he pressed me to speak, I told him I had no reason to
question the sincerity of his love to me after so many protestations,
but--and there I stopped, as if I left him to guess the rest.  'But
what, my dear?' says he.  'I guess what you mean:  what if you should
be with child?  Is not that it?  Why, then,' says he, 'I'll take care
of you and provide for you, and the child too; and that you may see I
am not in jest,' says he, 'here's an earnest for you,' and with that he
pulls out a silk purse, with an hundred guineas in it, and gave it me.
'And I'll give you such another,' says he, 'every year till I marry
you.'

My colour came and went, at the sight of the purse and with the fire of
his proposal together, so that I could not say a word, and he easily
perceived it; so putting the purse into my bosom, I made no more
resistance to him, but let him do just what he pleased, and as often as
he pleased; and thus I finished my own destruction at once, for from
this day, being forsaken of my virtue and my modesty, I had nothing of
value left to recommend me, either to God's blessing or man's
assistance.

But things did not end here.  I went back to the town, did the business
he publicly directed me to, and was at home before anybody thought me
long.  As for my gentleman, he stayed out, as he told me he would, till
late at night, and there was not the least suspicion in the family
either on his account or on mine.

We had, after this, frequent opportunities to repeat our crime
--chiefly by his contrivance--especially at home, when his mother and
the young ladies went abroad a-visiting, which he watched so narrowly
as never to miss; knowing always beforehand when they went out, and
then failed not to catch me all alone, and securely enough; so that we
took our fill of our wicked pleasure for near half a year; and yet,
which was the most to my satisfaction, I was not with child.

But before this half-year was expired, his younger brother, of whom I
have made some mention in the beginning of the story, falls to work
with me; and he, finding me alone in the garden one evening, begins a
story of the same kind to me, made good honest professions of being in
love with me, and in short, proposes fairly and honourably to marry me,
and that before he made any other offer to me at all.

I was now confounded, and driven to such an extremity as the like was
never known; at least not to me.  I resisted the proposal with
obstinacy; and now I began to arm myself with arguments.  I laid before
him the inequality of the match; the treatment I should meet with in
the family; the ingratitude it would be to his good father and mother,
who had taken me into their house upon such generous principles, and
when I was in such a low condition; and, in short, I said everything to
dissuade him from his design that I could imagine, except telling him
the truth, which would indeed have put an end to it all, but that I
durst not think of mentioning.

But here happened a circumstance that I did not expect indeed, which
put me to my shifts; for this young gentleman, as he was plain and
honest, so he pretended to nothing with me but what was so too; and,
knowing his own innocence, he was not so careful to make his having a
kindness for Mrs. Betty a secret in the house, as his brother was.  And
though he did not let them know that he had talked to me about it, yet
he said enough to let his sisters perceive he loved me, and his mother
saw it too, which, though they took no notice of it to me, yet they did
to him, an immediately I found their carriage to me altered, more than
ever before.

I saw the cloud, though I did not foresee the storm.  It was easy, I
say, to see that their carriage to me was altered, and that it grew
worse and worse every day; till at last I got information among the
servants that I should, in a very little while, be desired to remove.

I was not alarmed at the news, having a full satisfaction that I should
be otherwise provided for; and especially considering that I had reason
every day to expect I should be with child, and that then I should be
obliged to remove without any pretences for it.

After some time the younger gentleman took an opportunity to tell me
that the kindness he had for me had got vent in the family.  He did not
charge me with it, he said, for he know well enough which way it came
out.  He told me his plain way of  talking had been the occasion of it,
for that he did not make his respect for me so much a secret as he
might have done, and the reason was, that he was at a point, that if I
would consent to have him, he would tell them all openly that he loved
me, and that he intended to marry me; that it was true his father and
mother might resent it, and be unkind, but that he was now in a way to
live, being bred to the law, and he did not fear maintaining me
agreeable to what I should expect; and that, in short, as he believed I
would not be ashamed of him, so he was resolved not to be ashamed of
me, and that he scorned to be afraid to own me now, whom he resolved to
own after I was his wife, and therefore I had nothing to do but to give
him my hand, and he would answer for all the rest.

I was now in a dreadful condition indeed, and now I repented heartily
my easiness with the eldest brother; not from any reflection of
conscience, but from a view of the happiness I might have enjoyed, and
had now made impossible; for though I had no great scruples of
conscience, as I have said, to struggle with, yet I could not think of
being a whore to one brother and a wife to the other.  But then it came
into my thoughts that the first brother had promised to made me his
wife when he came to his estate; but I presently remembered what I had
often thought of, that he had never spoken a word of having me for a
wife after he had conquered me for a mistress; and indeed, till now,
though I said I thought of it often, yet it gave me no disturbance at
all, for as he did not seem in the least to lessen his affection to me,
so neither did he lessen his bounty, though he had the discretion
himself to desire me not to lay out a penny of what he gave me in
clothes, or to make the least show extraordinary, because it would
necessarily give jealousy in the family, since everybody know I could
come at such things no manner of ordinary way, but by some private
friendship, which they would presently have suspected.

But I was now in a great strait, and knew not what to do.  The main
difficulty was this:  the younger brother not only laid close siege to
me, but suffered it to be seen.  He would come into his sister's room,
and his mother's room, and sit down, and talk a thousand kind things of
me, and to me, even before their faces, and when they were all there.
This grew so public that the whole house talked of it, and his mother
reproved him for it, and their carriage to me appeared quite altered.
In short, his mother had let fall some speeches, as if she intended to
put me out of the family; that is, in English, to turn me out of doors.
Now I was sure this could not be a secret to his brother, only that he
might not think, as indeed nobody else yet did, that the youngest
brother had made any proposal to me about it; but as I easily could see
that it would go farther, so I saw likewise there was an absolute
necessity to speak of it to him, or that he would speak of it to me,
and which to do first I knew not; that is, whether I should break it to
him or let it alone till he should break it to me.

Upon serious consideration, for indeed now I began to consider things
very seriously, and never till now; I say, upon serious consideration,
I resolved to tell him of it first; and it was not long before I had an
opportunity, for the very next day his brother went to London upon some
business, and the family being out a-visiting, just as it had happened
before, and as indeed was often the case, he came according to his
custom, to spend an hour or two with Mrs. Betty.

When he came andd had sat down a while, he easily perceived there was an
alteration in my countenance, that I was not so free and pleasant with
him as I used to be, and particularly, that I had been a-crying; he was
not long before he took notice of it, and asked me in very kind terms
what was the matter, and if  anything troubled me.  I would have put it
off if I could, but it was not to be concealed; so after suffering many
importunities to draw that out of me which I longed as much as possible
to disclose, I told him that it was true something did trouble me, and
something of such a nature that I could not conceal from him, and yet
that I could not tell how to tell him of it neither; that it was a
thing that not only surprised me, but greatly perplexed me, and that I
knew not what course to take, unless he would direct me.  He told me
with great tenderness, that let it be what it would, I should not let
it trouble me, for he would protect me from all the world.

I then began at a distance, and told him I was afraid the ladies had
got some secret information of our correspondence; for that it was easy
to see that their conduct was very much changed towards me for a great
while, and that now it was come to that pass that they frequently found
fault with me, and sometimes fell quite out with me, though I never
gave them the least occasion; that whereas I used always to lie with
the eldest sister, I was lately put to lie by myself, or with one of
the maids; and that I had overheard them several times talking very
unkindly about me; but that which confirmed it all was, that one of the
servants had told me that she had heard I  was to be turned out, and
that it was not safe for the family that I should be any longer in the
house.

He smiled when he heard all this, and I asked him how he could make so
light of it, when he must needs know that if there was any discovery I
was undone for ever, and that even it would hurt him, though not ruin
him as it would me.  I upbraided him, that he was like all the rest of
the sex, that, when they had the character and honour of a woman at
their mercy, oftentimes made it their jest, and at least looked upon it
as a trifle, and counted the ruin of those they had had their will of
as a thing of no value.

He saw me warm and serious, and he changed his style immediately; he
told me he was sorry I should have such a thought of him; that he had
never given me the least occasion for it, but had been as tender of my
reputation as he could be of his own; that he was sure our
correspondence had been managed with so much address, that not one
creature in the family had so much as a suspicion of it; that if he
smiled when I told him my thoughts, it was at the assurance he lately
received, that our understanding one another was not so much as known
or guessed at; and that when he had told me how much reason he had to
be easy, I should smile as he did, for he was very certain it would
give me a full satisfaction.

'This is a mystery I cannot understand,' says I, 'or how it should be
to my satisfaction that I am to be turned out of doors; for if our
correspondence is not discovered, I know not what else I have done to
change the countenances of the whole family to me, or to have them
treat me as they do now, who formerly used me with so much tenderness,
as if I had been one of their own children.'

'Why, look you, child,' says he, 'that they are uneasy about you, that
is true; but that they have the least suspicion of the case as it is,
and as it respects you and I, is so far from being true, that they
suspect my brother Robin; and, in short, they are fully persuaded he
makes love to you; nay, the fool has put it into their heads too
himself, for he is continually bantering them about it, and making a
jest of himself.  I confess I think he is wrong to do so, because he
cannot but see it vexes them, and makes them unkind to you; but 'tis a
satisfaction to me, because of the assurance it gives me, that they do
not suspect me in the least, and I hope this will be to your
satisfaction too.'

'So it is,' says I, 'one way; but this does not reach my case at all,
nor is this the chief thing that troubles me, though I have been
concerned about that too.'  'What is it, then?' says he.  With which I
fell to tears, and could say nothing to him at all.  He strove to
pacify me all he could, but began at last to be very pressing upon me
to tell what it was.  At last I answered that I thought I ought to tell
him too, and that he had some right to know it; besides, that I wanted
his direction in the case, for I was in such perplexity that I knew not
what course to take, and then I related the whole affair to him.  I
told him how imprudently his brother had managed himself, in making
himself so public; for that if he had kept it a secret, as such a thing
out to have been, I could but have denied him positively, without
giving any reason for it, and he would in time have ceased his
solicitations; but that he had the vanity, first, to depend upon it
that I would not deny him, and then had taken the freedom to tell his
resolution of having me to the whole house.

I told him how far I had resisted him, and told him how sincere and
honourable his offers were.  'But,' says I, 'my case will be doubly
hard; for as they carry it ill to me now, because he desires to have
me, they'll carry it worse when they shall find I have denied him; and
they will presently say, there's something else in it, and then out it
comes that I am married already to somebody else, or that I would never
refuse a match so much above me as this was.'

This discourse surprised him indeed very much.  He told me that it was
a critical point indeed for me to manage, and he did not see which way
I should get out of it; but he would consider it, and let me know next
time we met, what resolution he was come to about it; and in the
meantime desired I would not give my consent to his brother, nor yet
give him a flat denial, but that I would hold him in suspense a while.

I seemed to start at his saying I should not give him my consent.  I
told him he knew very well I had no consent to give; that he had
engaged himself to marry me, and that my consent was the same time
engaged to him; that he had all along told me I was his wife, and I
looked upon myself as effectually so as if the ceremony had passed; and
that it was from his own mouth that I did so, he having all along
persuaded me to call myself his wife.

'Well, my dear,' says he, 'don't be concerned at that now; if I am not
your husband, I'll be as good as a husband to you; and do not let those
things trouble you now, but let me look a little farther into this
affair, and I shall be able to say more next time we meet.'

He pacified me as well as he could with this, but I found he was very
thoughtful, and that though he was very kind to me and  kissed me a
thousand times, and more I believe, and gave me money too, yet he
offered no more all the while we were together, which was above two
hours, and which I much wondered at indeed at that time, considering
how it used to be, and what opportunity we had.

His brother did not come from London for five or six days, and it was
two days more before he got an opportunity to talk with him; but then
getting him by himself he began to talk very close to him about it, and
the same evening got an opportunity (for we had a long conference
together) to repeat all their discourse to me, which, as near as I can
remember, was to the purpose following.  He told him he heard strange
news of him since he went, viz. that he made love to Mrs. Betty.
'Well, says his brother a little angrily, 'and so I do.  And what then?
What has anybody to do with that?'  'Nay,' says his brother, 'don't be
angry, Robin; I don't pretend to have anything to do with it; nor do I
pretend to be angry with you about it.  But I find they do concern
themselves about it, and that they have used the poor girl ill about
it, which I should take as done to myself.'  'Whom do you mean by
THEY?' says Robin.  'I mean my mother and the girls,' says the elder
brother.  'But hark ye,' says his brother, 'are you in earnest?  Do you
really love this girl?  You may be free with me, you know.'  'Why,
then,' says Robin, 'I will be free with you; I do love her above all
the women in the world, and I will have her, let them say and do what
they will.  I believe the girl will not deny me.'

It struck me to the heart when he told me this, for though it was most
rational to think I would not deny him, yet I knew in my own conscience
I must deny him, and I saw my ruin in my being obliged to do so; but I
knew it was my business to talk otherwise then, so I interrupted him in
his story thus.

'Ay!' said I, 'does he think I cannot deny him?  But he shall find I
can deny him, for all that.'

'Well, my dear,' says he, 'but let me give you the whole story as it
went on between us, and then say what you will.'

Then he went on and told me that he replied thus:  'But, brother, you
know she has nothing, and you may have several ladies with good
fortunes.'

''Tis no matter for that,' said Robin; 'I love the girl, and I will
never please my pocket in marrying, and not please my fancy.' 'And so,
my dear,' adds he, 'there is no opposing him.'

'Yes, yes,' says I, 'you shall see I can oppose him; I have learnt to
say No, now though I had not learnt it before; if the best lord in the
land offered me marriage now, I could very cheerfully say No to him.'

'Well, but, my dear,' says he, 'what can you say to him?  You know, as
you said when we talked of it before, he well ask you many questions
about it, and all the house will wonder what the meaning of it should
be.'

'Why,' says I, smiling, 'I can stop all their mouths at one clap by
telling him, and them too, that I am married already to his elder
brother.'

He smiled a little too at the word, but I could see it startled him,
and he could not hide the disorder it put him into.  However, he
returned, 'Why, though that may be true in some sense, yet I suppose
you are but in jest when you talk of giving such an answer as that; it
may not be convenient on many accounts.'

'No, no,' says I pleasantly, 'I am not so fond of letting the secret
come out without your consent.'

'But what, then, can you say to him, or to them,' says he, 'when they
find you positive against a match which would be apparently so much to
your advantage?'

'Why,' says I, 'should I be at a loss?  First of all, I am not obliged
to give me any reason at all; on the other hand, I may tell them I am
married already, and stop there, and that will be a full stop too to
him, for he can have no reason to ask one question after it.'

'Ay,' says he; 'but the whole house will tease you about that, even to
father and mother, and if you deny them positively, they will be
disobliged at you, and suspicious besides.'

'Why,' says I, 'what can I do?  What would you have me do?  I was in
straight enough before, and as I told you, I was in perplexity before,
and acquainted you with the circumstances, that I might have your
advice.'

'My dear,' says he, 'I have been considering very much upon it, you may
be sure, and though it is a piece of advice that has a great many
mortifications in it to me, and may at first seem strange to you, yet,
all things considered, I see no better way for you than to let him go
on; and if you find him hearty and in earnest, marry him.'

I gave him a look full of horror at those words, and, turning pale as
death, was at the very point of sinking down out of the chair I sat in;
when, giving a start, 'My dear,' says he aloud, 'what's the matter with
you?  Where are you a-going?' and a great many such things; and with
jogging and called to me, fetched me a little to myself, though it was
a good while before I fully recovered my senses, and was not able to
speak for several minutes more.

When I was fully recovered he began again.  'My dear,' says he, 'what
made you so surprised at what I said?  I would have you consider
seriously of it?  You may see plainly how the family stand in this
case, and they would be stark mad if it was my case, as it is my
brother's; and for aught I see, it would be my ruin and yours too.'

'Ay!' says I, still speaking angrily; 'are all your protestations and
vows to be shaken by the dislike of the family?  Did I not always
object that to you, and you made light thing of it, as what you were
above, and would value; and is it come to this now?' said I.  'Is this
your faith and honour, your love, and the solidity of your promises?'

He continued perfectly calm, notwithstanding all my reproaches, and I
was not sparing of them at all; but he replied at last, 'My dear, I
have not broken one promise with you yet; I did tell you I would marry
you when I was come to my estate; but you see my father is a hale,
healthy man, and may live these thirty years still, and not be older
than several are round us in town; and you never proposed my marrying
you sooner, because you knew it might be my ruin; and as to all the
rest, I have not failed you in anything, you have wanted for nothing.'

I could not deny a word of this, and had nothing to say to it in
general.  'But why, then,' says I, 'can you persuade me to such a
horrid step as leaving you, since you have not left me?  Will you allow
no affection, no love on my side, where there has been so much on your
side?  Have I made you no returns?  Have I given no testimony of my
sincerity and of my passion?  Are the sacrifices I have made of honour
and modesty to you no proof of my being tied to you in bonds too strong
to be broken?'

'But here, my dear,' says he, 'you may come into a safe station, and
appear with honour and with splendour at once, and the remembrance of
what we have done may be wrapt up in an eternal silence, as if it had
never happened; you shall always have my respect, and my sincere
affection, only then it shall be honest, and perfectly just to my
brother; you shall be my dear sister, as now you are my dear----' and
there he stopped.

'Your dear whore,' says I, 'you would have said if you had gone on, and
you might as well have said it; but I understand you.  However, I
desire you to remember the long discourses you have had with me, and
the many hours' pains you have taken to persuade me to believe myself
an honest woman; that I was your wife intentionally, though not in the
eyes of the world, and that it was as effectual a marriage that had
passed between us as if we had been publicly wedded by the parson of
the parish.  You know and cannot but remember that these have been your
own words to me.'

I found this was a little too close upon him, but I made it up in what
follows.  He stood stock-still for a while and said nothing, and I went
on thus:  'You cannot,' says I, 'without the highest injustice, believe
that I yielded upon all these persuasions without a love not to be
questioned, not to be shaken again by anything that could happen
afterward.  If you have such dishonourable thoughts of me, I must ask
you what foundation in any of my behaviour have I given for such a
suggestion?

'If, then, I have yielded to the importunities of my affection, and if
I have been persuaded to believe that I am really, and in the essence
of the thing, your wife, shall I now give the lie to all those
arguments and call myself your whore, or mistress, which is the same
thing?  And will you transfer me to your brother?  Can you transfer my
affection?  Can you bid me cease loving you, and bid me love him?  It
is in my power, think you, to make such a change at demand?  No, sir,'
said I, 'depend upon it 'tis impossible, and whatever the change of
your side may be, I will ever be true; and I had much rather, since it
is come that unhappy length, be your whore than your brother's wife.'

He appeared pleased and touched with the impression of this last
discourse, and told me that he stood where he did before; that he had
not been unfaithful to me in any one promise he had ever made yet, but
that there were so many terrible things presented themselves to his
view in the affair before me, and that on my account in particular,
that he had thought of the other as a remedy so effectual as nothing
could come up to it.  That he thought this would not be entire parting
us, but we might love as friends all our days, and perhaps with more
satisfaction than we should in the station we were now in, as things
might happen; that he durst say, I could not apprehend anything from
him as to betraying a secret, which could not but be the destruction of
us both, if it came out; that he had but one question to ask of me that
could lie in the way of it, and if that question was answered in the
negative, he could not but think still it was the only step I could
take.

I guessed at his question presently, namely, whether I was sure I was
not with child?  As to that, I told him he need not be concerned about
it, for I was not with child.  'Why, then, my dear,' says he, 'we have
no time to talk further now.  Consider of it, and think closely about
it; I cannot but be of the opinion still, that it will be the best
course you can take.' And with this he took his leave, and the more
hastily too, his mother and sisters ringing at the gate, just at the
moment that he had risen up to go.

He left me in the utmost confusion of  thought; and he easily perceived
it the next day, and all the rest of the week, for it was but Tuesday
evening when we talked; but he had no opportunity to come at me all
that week, till the Sunday after, when I, being indisposed, did not go
to church, and he, making some excuse for the like, stayed at home.

And now he had me an hour and a half again by myself, and we fell into
the same arguments all over again, or at least so near the same, as it
would be to no purpose to repeat them.  At last I asked him warmly,
what opinion he must have of my modesty, that he could suppose I should
so much as entertain a thought of lying with two brothers, and assured
him it could never be.  I added, if he was to tell me that he would
never see me more, than which nothing but death could be more terrible,
yet I could never entertain a thought so dishonourable to myself, and
so base to him; and therefore, I entreated him, if he had one grain of
respect or affection left for me, that he would speak no more of it to
me, or that he would pull his sword out and kill me.  He appeared
surprised at my obstinacy, as he called it; told me I was unkind to
myself, and unkind to him in it; that it was a crisis unlooked for upon
us both, and impossible for either of us to foresee, but that he did
not see any other way to save us both from ruin, and therefore he
thought it the more unkind; but that if he must say no more of it to
me, he added with an unusual coldness, that he did not know anything
else we had to talk of; and so he rose up to take his leave.  I rose up
too, as if with the same indifference; but when he came to give me as
it were a parting kiss, I burst out into such a passion of crying, that
though I would have spoke, I could not, and only pressing his hand,
seemed to give him the adieu, but cried vehemently.

He was sensibly moved with this; so he sat down again, and said a great
many kind things to me, to abate the excess of my passion, but still
urged the necessity of what he had proposed; all the while insisting,
that if I did refuse, he would notwithstanding provide for me; but
letting me plainly see that he would decline me in the main point--nay,
even as a mistress; making it a point of honour not to lie with the
woman that, for aught he knew, might come to be his brother's wife.

The bare loss of him as a gallant was not so much my affliction as the
loss of his person, whom indeed I loved to distraction; and the loss of
all the expectations I had, and which I always had built my hopes upon,
of having him one day for my husband.  These things oppressed my mind
so much, that, in short, I fell very ill; the agonies of my mind, in a
word, threw me into a high fever, and long it was, that none in the
family expected my life.

I was reduced very low indeed, and was often delirious and
light-headed; but nothing lay so near me as the fear that, when I was
light-headed, I should say something or other to his prejudice.  I was
distressed in my mind also to see him, and so he was to see me, for he
really loved me most passionately; but it could not be; there was not
the least room to desire it on one side or other, or so much as to make
it decent.

It was near five weeks that I kept my bed and though the violence of my
fever abated in three weeks, yet it several times returned; and the
physicians said two or three times, they could do no more for me, but
that they must leave nature and the distemper to fight it out, only
strengthening the first with cordials to maintain the struggle.  After
the end of five weeks I grew better, but was so weak, so altered, so
melancholy, and recovered so slowly, that they physicians apprehended I
should go into a consumption; and which vexed me most, they gave it as
their opinion that my mind was oppressed, that something troubled me,
and, in short, that I was in love.  Upon this, the whole house was set
upon me to examine me, and to press me to tell whether I was in love or
not, and with whom; but as I well might, I denied my being in love at
all.

They had on this occasion a squabble one day about me at table, that
had like to have put the whole family in an uproar, and for some time
did so.  They happened to be all at table but the father; as for me, I
was ill, and in my chamber.  At the beginning of the talk, which was
just as they had finished their dinner, the old gentlewoman, who had
sent me somewhat to eat, called her maid to go up and ask me if I would
have any more; but the maid brought down word I had not eaten half what
she had sent me already.

'Alas, says the old lady, 'that poor girl!  I am afraid she will never
be well.'

'Well!' says the elder brother, 'how should Mrs. Betty be well?  They
say she is in love.'

'I believe nothing of it,' says the old gentlewoman.

'I don't know,' says the eldest sister, 'what to say to it; they have
made such a rout about her being so handsome, and so charming, and I
know not what, and that in her hearing too, that has turned the
creature's head, I believe, and who knows what possessions may follow
such doings?  For my part, I don't know what to make of it.'

'Why, sister, you must acknowledge she is very handsome,' says the
elder brother.

'Ay, and a great deal handsomer than you, sister,' says Robin, 'and
that's your mortification.'

'Well, well, that is not the question,' says his sister; 'that girl is
well enough, and she knows it well enough; she need not be told of it
to make her vain.'

'We are not talking of her being vain,' says the elder brother, 'but of
her being in love; it may be she is in love with herself; it seems my
sisters think so.'

'I would she was in love with me,' says Robin; 'I'd quickly put her out
of her pain.'

'What d'ye mean by that, son,' says the old lady; 'how can you talk so?'

'Why, madam,' says Robin, again, very honestly, 'do you think I'd let
the poor girl die for love, and of one that is near at hand to be had,
too?'

'Fie, brother!', says the second sister, 'how can you talk so?  Would
you take a creature that has not a groat in the world?'

'Prithee, child,' says Robin, 'beauty's a portion, and good-humour with
it is a double portion; I wish thou hadst half her stock of both for
thy portion.'  So there was her mouth stopped.

'I find,' says the eldest sister, 'if Betty is not in love, my brother
is.  I wonder he has not broke his mind to Betty; I warrant she won't
say No.'

'They that yield when they're asked,' says Robin, 'are one step before
them that were never asked to yield, sister, and two steps before them
that yield before they are asked; and that's an answer to you, sister.'

This fired the sister, and she flew into a passion, and said, things
were come to that pass that it was time the wench, meaning me, was out
of the family; and but that she was not fit to be turned out, she hoped
her father and mother would consider of it as soon as she could be
removed.

Robin replied, that was business for the master and mistress of the
family, who where not to be taught by one that had so little judgment
as his eldest sister.

It ran up a great deal farther; the sister scolded, Robin rallied and
bantered, but poor Betty lost ground by it extremely in the family.  I
heard of it, and I cried heartily, and the old lady came up to me,
somebody having told her that I was so much concerned about it.  I
complained to her, that it was very hard the doctors should pass such a
censure upon me, for which they had no ground; and that it was still
harder, considering the circumstances I was under in the family; that I
hoped I had done nothing to lessen her esteem for me, or given any
occasion for the bickering between her sons and daughters, and I had
more need to think of a coffin than of being in love, and begged she
would not let me suffer in her opinion for anybody's mistakes but my
own.

She was sensible of the justice of what I said, but told me, since
there had been such a clamour among them, and that her younger son
talked after such a rattling way as he did, she desired I would be so
faithful to her as to answer her but one question sincerely.  I told
her I would, with all my heart, and with the utmost plainness and
sincerity.  Why, then, the question was, whether there was anything
between her son Robert and me.  I told her with all the protestations
of sincerity that I was able to make, and as I might well, do, that
there was not, nor ever had been; I told her that Mr. Robert had
rattled and jested, as she knew it was his way, and that I took it
always, as I supposed he meant it, to be a wild airy way of discourse
that had no signification in it; and again assured her, that there was
not the least tittle of what she understood by it between us; and that
those who had suggested it had done me a great deal of wrong, and Mr.
Robert no service at all.

The old lady was fully satisfied, and kissed me, spoke cheerfully to
me, and bid me take care of my health and want for nothing, and so took
her leave.  But when she came down she found the brother and all his
sisters together by the ears; they were angry, even to passion, at his
upbraiding them with their being homely, and having never had any
sweethearts, never having been asked the question, and their being so
forward as almost to ask first.  He rallied them upon the subject of
Mrs. Betty; how pretty, how good-humoured, how she sung better then
they did, and danced better, and how much handsomer she was; and in
doing this he omitted no ill-natured thing that could vex them, and
indeed, pushed too hard upon them.  The old lady came down in the
height of it, and to put a stop it to, told them all the discourse she
had had with me, and how I answered, that there was nothing between Mr.
Robert and I.

'She's wrong there,' says Robin, 'for if there was not a great deal
between us, we should be closer together than we are.  I told her I
loved her hugely,' says he, 'but I could never make the jade believe I
was in earnest.'  'I do not know how you should,' says his mother;
'nobody in their senses could believe you were in earnest, to talk so
to a poor girl, whose circumstances you know so well.

'But prithee, son,' adds she, 'since you tell me that you could not
make her believe you were in earnest, what must we believe about it?
For you ramble so in your discourse, that nobody knows whether you are
in earnest or in jest; but as I find the girl, by your own confession,
has answered truly, I wish you would do so too, and tell me seriously,
so that I may depend upon it.  Is there anything in it or no?  Are you
in earnest or no?  Are you distracted, indeed, or are you not?  'Tis a
weighty question, and I wish you would make us easy about it.'

'By my faith, madam,' says Robin, ''tis in vain to mince the matter or
tell any more lies about it; I am in earnest, as much as a man is
that's going to be hanged.  If Mrs. Betty would say she loved me, and
that she would marry me, I'd have her tomorrow morning fasting, and
say, 'To have and to hold,' instead of eating my breakfast.'

'Well,' says the mother, 'then there's one son lost'; and she said it
in a very mournful tone, as one greatly concerned at it.

'I hope not, madam,' says Robin; 'no man is lost when a good wife has
found him.'

'Why, but, child,' says the old lady, 'she is a beggar.'

'Why, then, madam, she has the more need of charity,' says Robin; 'I'll
take her off the hands of the parish, and she and I'll beg together.'

'It's bad jesting with such things,' says the mother.

'I don't jest, madam,' says Robin.  'We'll come and beg your pardon,
madam; and your blessing, madam, and my father's.'

'This is all out of the way, son,' says the mother.  'If you are in
earnest you are undone.'

'I am afraid not,' says he, 'for I am really afraid she won't have me;
after all my sister's huffing and blustering, I believe I shall never
be able to persuade her to it.'

'That's a fine tale, indeed; she is not so far out of her senses
neither.  Mrs. Betty is no fool,' says the younger sister.  'Do you
think she has learnt to say No, any more than other people?'

'No, Mrs. Mirth-wit,' says Robin, 'Mrs. Betty's no fool; but Mrs. Betty
may be engaged some other way, and what then?'

'Nay,' says the eldest sister, 'we can say nothing to that.  Who must
it be to, then?  She is never out of the doors; it must be between you.'

'I have nothing to say to that,' says Robin.  'I have been examined
enough; there's my brother.  If it must be between us, go to work with
him.'

This stung the elder brother to the quick, and he concluded that Robin
had discovered something.  However, he kept himself from appearing
disturbed.  'Prithee,' says he, 'don't go to shame your stories off
upon me; I tell you, I deal in no such ware; I have nothing to say to
Mrs. Betty, nor to any of the Mrs. Bettys in the parish'; and with that
he rose up and brushed off.

'No,' says the eldest sister, 'I dare answer for my brother; he knows
the world better.'

Thus the discourse ended, but it left the elder brother quite
confounded.  He concluded his brother had made a full discovery, and he
began to doubt whether I had been concerned in it or not; but with all
his management he could not bring it about to get at me.  At last he
was so perplexed that he was quite desperate, and resolved he would
come into my chamber and see me, whatever came of it.  In order to do
this, he contrived it so, that one day after dinner, watching his
eldest sister till he could see her go upstairs, he runs after her.
'Hark ye, sister,' says he, 'where is this sick woman?  May not a body
see her?'  'Yes,' says the sister, 'I believe you may; but let me go
first a little, and I'll tell you.'  So she ran up to the door and gave
me notice, and presently called to him again.  'Brother,' says she,
'you may come if you please.'  So in he came, just in the same kind of
rant.  'Well,' says he at the door as he came in, 'where is this sick
body that's in love?  How do ye do, Mrs. Betty?'  I would have got up
out of my chair, but was so weak I could not for a good while; and he
saw it, and his sister too, and she said, 'Come, do not strive to stand
up; my brother desires no ceremony, especially now you are so weak.'
'No, no, Mrs. Betty, pray sit still,' says he, and so sits himself down
in a chair over against me, and appeared as if he was mighty merry.

He talked a lot of rambling stuff to his sister and to me, sometimes of
one thing, sometimes of another, on purpose to amuse his sister, and
every now and then would turn it upon the old story, directing it to
me.  'Poor Mrs. Betty,' says he, 'it is a sad thing to be in love; why,
it has reduced you sadly.'  At last I spoke a little.  'I am glad to
see you so merry, sir,' says I; 'but I think the doctor might have
found something better to do than to make his game at his patients.  If
I had been ill of no other distemper, I know the proverb too well to
have let him come to me.'  'What proverb?' says he, 'Oh!  I remember it
now.  What--

     "Where love is the case,
      The doctor's an ass."

Is not that it, Mrs. Betty?'  I smiled and said nothing.  'Nay,' says
he, 'I think the effect has proved it to be love, for it seems the
doctor has been able to do you but little service; you mend very
slowly, they say.  I doubt there's somewhat in it, Mrs. Betty; I doubt
you are sick of the incurables, and that is love.'  I smiled and said,
'No, indeed, sir, that's none of my distemper.'

We had a deal of such discourse, and sometimes others that signified as
little.  By and by he asked me to sing them a song, at which I smiled,
and said my singing days were over.  At last he asked me if he should
play upon his flute to me; his sister said she believe it would hurt
me, and that my head could not bear it.  I bowed, and said, No, it
would not hurt me.  'And, pray, madam.' said I, 'do not hinder it; I
love the music of the flute very much.'  Then his sister said, 'Well,
do, then, brother.'  With that he pulled out the key of his closet.
'Dear sister,' says he, 'I am very lazy; do step to my closet and fetch
my flute; it lies in such a drawer,' naming a place where he was sure
it was not, that she might be a little while a-looking for it.

As soon as she was gone, he related the whole story to me of the
discourse his brother had about me, and of his pushing it at him, and
his concern about it, which was the reason of his contriving this visit
to me.  I assured him I had never opened my mouth either to his brother
or to anybody else.  I told him the dreadful exigence I was in; that my
love to him, and his offering to have me forget that affection and
remove it to another, had thrown me down; and that I had a thousand
times wished I might die rather than recover, and to have the same
circumstances to struggle with as I had before, and that his
backwardness to life had been the great reason of the slowness of my
recovering.  I added that I foresaw that as soon as I was well, I must
quit the family, and that as for marrying his brother, I abhorred the
thoughts of it after what had been my case with him, and that he might
depend upon it I would never see his brother again upon that subject;
that if he would break all his vows and oaths and engagements with me,
be that between his conscience and his honour and himself; but he
should never be able to say that I, whom he had persuaded to call
myself his wife, and who had given him the liberty to use me as a wife,
was not as faithful to him as a wife ought to be, whatever he might be
to me.

He was going to reply, and had said that he was sorry I could not be
persuaded, and was a-going to say more, but he heard his sister
a-coming, and so did I; and yet I forced out these few words as a
reply, that I could never be persuaded to love one brother and marry
another.  He shook his head and said, 'Then I am ruined,' meaning
himself; and that moment his sister entered the room and told him she
could not find the flute. 'Well,' says he merrily, 'this laziness won't
do'; so he gets up and goes himself to go to look for it, but comes
back without it too; not but that he could have found it, but because
his mind was a little disturbed, and he had no mind to play; and,
besides, the errand he sent his sister on was answered another way; for
he only wanted an opportunity to speak to me, which he gained, though
not much to his satisfaction.

I had, however, a great deal of satisfaction in having spoken my mind
to him with freedom, and with such an honest plainness, as I have
related; and though it did not at all work the way I desired, that is
to say, to oblige the person to me the more, yet it took from him all
possibility of quitting me but by a downright breach of honour, and
giving up all the faith of a gentleman to me, which he had so often
engaged by, never to abandon me, but to make me his wife as soon as he
came to his estate.

It was not many weeks after this before I was about the house again,
and began to grow well; but I continued melancholy, silent, dull, and
retired, which amazed the whole family, except he that knew the reason
of it; yet it was a great while before he took any notice of it, and I,
as backward to speak as he, carried respectfully to him, but never
offered to speak a word to him that was particular of any kind
whatsoever; and this continued for sixteen or seventeen weeks; so that,
as I expected every day to be dismissed the family, on account of what
distaste they had taken another way, in which I had no guilt, so I
expected to hear no more of this gentleman, after all his solemn vows
and protestations, but to be ruined and abandoned.

At last I broke the way myself in the family for my removing; for being
talking seriously with the old lady one day, about my own circumstances
in the world, and how my distemper had left a heaviness upon my
spirits, that I was not the same thing I was before, the old lady said,
'I am afraid, Betty, what I have said to you about my son has had some
influence upon you, and that you are melancholy on his account; pray,
will you let me know how the matter stands with you both, if it may not
be improper?  For, as for Robin, he does nothing but rally and banter
when I speak of it to him.'  'Why, truly, madam,' said I 'that matter
stands as I wish it did not, and I shall be very sincere with you in
it, whatever befalls me for it.  Mr. Robert has several times proposed
marriage to me, which is what I had no reason to expect, my poor
circumstances considered; but I have always resisted him, and that
perhaps in terms more positive than became me, considering the regard
that I ought to have for every branch of your family; but,' said I,
'madam, I could never so far forget my obligation to you and all your
house, to offer to consent to a thing which I know must needs be
disobliging to you, and this I have made my argument to him, and have
positively told him that I would never entertain a thought of that kind
unless I had your consent, and his father's also, to whom I was bound
by so many invincible obligations.'

'And is this possible, Mrs. Betty?' says the old lady.  'Then you have
been much juster to us than we have been to you; for we have all looked
upon you as a kind of snare to my son, and I had a proposal to make to
you for your removing, for fear of it; but I had not yet mentioned it
to you, because I thought you were not thorough well, and I was afraid
of grieving you too much, lest it should throw you down again; for we
have all a respect for you still, though not so much as to have it be
the ruin of my son; but if it be as you say, we have all wronged you
very much.'

'As to the truth of what I say, madam,' said I, 'refer you to your son
himself; if he will do me any justice, he must tell you the story just
as I have told it.'

Away goes the old lady to her daughters and tells them the whole story,
just as I had told it her; and they were surprised at it, you may be
sure, as I believed they would be.  One said she could never have
thought it; another said Robin was a fool; a third said she would not
believe a word of it, and she would warrant that Robin would tell the
story another way.  But the old gentlewoman, who was resolved to go to
the bottom of it before I could have the least opportunity of
acquainting her son with what had passed, resolved too that she would
talk with her son immediately, and to that purpose sent for him, for he
was gone but to a lawyer's house in the town, upon some petty business
of his own, and upon her sending he returned immediately.

Upon his coming up to them, for they were all still together, 'Sit
down, Robin,' says the old lady, 'I must have some talk with you.'
'With all my heart, madam,' says Robin, looking very merry.  'I hope it
is about a good wife, for I am at a great loss in that affair.'  'How
can that be?' says his mother; 'did not you say you resolved to have
Mrs. Betty?'  'Ay, madam,' says Robin, 'but there is one has forbid the
banns.'  'Forbid, the banns!' says his mother; 'who can that be?' 'Even
Mrs. Betty herself,' says Robin.  'How so?' says his mother.  'Have you
asked her the question, then?'  'Yes, indeed, madam,' says Robin.  'I
have attacked her in form five times since she was sick, and am beaten
off; the jade is so stout she won't capitulate nor yield upon any
terms, except such as I cannot effectually grant.' 'Explain yourself,'
says the mother, 'for I am surprised; I do not understand you.  I hope
you are not in earnest.'

'Why, madam,' says he, 'the case is plain enough upon me, it explains
itself; she won't have me, she says; is not that plain enough?  I think
'tis plain, and pretty rough too.'  'Well, but,' says the mother, 'you
talk of conditions that you cannot grant; what does she want--a
settlement?  Her jointure ought to be according to her portion; but
what fortune does she bring you?' 'Nay, as to fortune,' says Robin,
'she is rich enough; I am satisfied in that point; but 'tis I that am
not able to come up to her terms, and she is positive she will not have
me without.'

Here the sisters put in.  'Madam,' says the second sister, ''tis
impossible to be serious with him; he will never give a direct answer
to anything; you had better let him alone, and talk no more of it to
him; you know how to dispose of her out of his way if you thought there
was anything in it.'  Robin was a little warmed with his sister's
rudeness, but he was even with her, and yet with good manners too.
'There are two sorts of people, madam,' says he, turning to his mother,
'that there is no contending with; that is, a wise body and a fool;
'tis a little hard I should engage with both of them together.'

The younger sister then put in.  'We must be fools indeed,' says she,
'in my brother's opinion, that he should think we can believe he has
seriously asked Mrs. Betty to marry him, and that she has refused him.'

'Answer, and answer not, say Solomon,' replied her brother.  'When your
brother had said to your mother that he had asked her no less than five
times, and that it was so, that she positively denied him, methinks a
younger sister need not question the truth of it when her mother did
not.'  'My mother, you see, did not understand it,' says the second
sister.  'There's some difference,' says Robin, 'between desiring me to
explain it, and telling me she did not believe it.'

'Well, but, son,' says the old lady, 'if you are disposed to let us
into the mystery of it, what were these hard conditions?' 'Yes, madam,'
says Robin, 'I had done it before now, if the teasers here had not
worried me by way of interruption.  The conditions are, that I bring my
father and you to consent to it, and without that she protests she will
never see me more upon that head; and to these conditions, as I said, I
suppose I shall never be able to grant.  I hope my warm sisters will be
answered now, and blush a little; if not, I have no more to say till I
hear further.'

This answer was surprising to them all, though less to the mother,
because of what I had said to her.  As to the daughters, they stood
mute a great while; but the mother said with some passion, 'Well, I had
heard this before, but I could not believe it; but if it is so, then we
have all done Betty wrong, and she has behaved better than I ever
expected.'  'Nay,' says the eldest sister, 'if it be so, she has acted
handsomely indeed.'  'I confess,' says the mother, 'it was none of her
fault, if he was fool enough to take a fancy to her; but to give such
an answer to him, shows more respect to your father and me than I can
tell how to express; I shall value the girl the better for it as long
as I know her.'  'But I shall not,' says Robin, 'unless you will give
your consent.' 'I'll consider of that a while,' says the mother; 'I
assure you, if there were not some other objections in the way, this
conduct of hers would go a great way to bring me to consent.'  'I wish
it would go quite through it,' says Robin; 'if you had as much thought
about making me easy as you have about making me rich, you would soon
consent to it.'

'Why, Robin,' says the mother again, 'are you really in earnest?  Would
you so fain have her as you pretend?'  'Really, madam,' says Robin, 'I
think 'tis hard you should question me upon that head after all I have
said.  I won't say that I will have her; how can I resolve that point,
when you see I cannot have her without your consent?  Besides, I am not
bound to marry at all.  But this I will say, I am in earnest in, that I
will never have anybody else if I can help it; so you may determine for
me.  Betty or nobody is the word, and the question which of the two
shall be in your breast to decide, madam, provided only, that my
good-humoured sisters here may have no vote in it.'

All this was dreadful to me, for the mother began to yield, and Robin
pressed her home on it.  On the other hand, she advised with the eldest
son, and he used all the arguments in the world to persuade her to
consent; alleging his brother's passionate love for me, and my generous
regard to the family, in refusing my own advantages upon such a nice
point of honour, and a thousand such things.  And as to the father, he
was a man in a hurry of public affairs and getting money, seldom at
home, thoughtful of the main chance, but left all those things to his
wife.

You may easily believe, that when the plot was thus, as they thought,
broke out, and that every one thought they knew how things were
carried, it was not so difficult or so dangerous for the elder brother,
whom nobody suspected of anything, to have a freer access to me than
before; nay, the mother, which was just as he wished, proposed it to
him to talk with Mrs. Betty.  'For it may be, son,' said she, 'you may
see farther into the thing than I, and see if you think she has been so
positive as Robin says she has been, or no.'  This was as well as he
could wish, and he, as it were, yielding to talk with me at his
mother's request, she brought me to him into her own chamber, told me
her son had some business with me at her request, and desired me to be
very sincere with him, and then she left us together, and he went and
shut the door after her.

He came back to me and took me in his arms, and kissed me very
tenderly; but told me he had a long discourse to hold with me, and it
was not come to that crisis, that I should make myself happy or
miserable as long as I lived; that the thing was now gone so far, that
if I could not comply with his desire, we would both be ruined.  Then
he told the whole story between Robin, as he called him, and his mother
and sisters and himself, as it is above.  'And now, dear child,' says
he, 'consider what it will be to marry a gentleman of a good family, in
good circumstances, and with the consent of the whole house, and to
enjoy all that the world can give you; and what, on the other hand, to
be sunk into the dark circumstances of a woman that has lost her
reputation; and that though I shall be a private friend to you while I
live, yet as I shall be suspected always, so you will be afraid to see
me, and I shall be afraid to own you.'

He gave me no time to reply, but went on with me thus:  'What has
happened between us, child, so long as we both agree to do so, may be
buried and forgotten.  I shall always be your sincere friend, without
any inclination to nearer intimacy, when you become my sister; and we
shall have all the honest part of conversation without any reproaches
between us of having done amiss.  I beg of you to consider it, and to
not stand in the way of your own safety and prosperity; and to satisfy
you that I am sincere,' added he, 'I here offer you #500 in money, to
make you some amends for the freedoms I have taken with you, which we
shall look upon as some of the follies of our lives,  which 'tis hoped
we may repent of.'

He spoke this in so much more moving terms than it is possible for me
to express, and with so much greater force of argument than I can
repeat, that I only recommend it to those who read the story, to
suppose, that as he held me above an hour and a half in that discourse,
so he answered all my objections, and fortified his discourse with all
the arguments that human wit and art could devise.

I cannot say, however, that anything he said made impression enough
upon me so as to give me any thought of the matter, till he told me at
last very plainly, that if I refused, he was sorry to add that he could
never go on with me in that station as we stood before; that though he
loved me as well as ever, and that I was as agreeable to him as ever,
yet sense of virtue had not so far forsaken him as to suffer him to lie
with a woman that his brother courted to make his wife; and if he took
his leave of me, with a denial in this affair, whatever he might do for
me in the point of support, grounded on his first engagement of
maintaining me, yet he would not have me be surprised that he was
obliged to tell me he could not allow himself to see me any more; and
that, indeed, I could not expect it of him.

I received this last part with some token of surprise and disorder, and
had much ado to avoid sinking down, for indeed I loved him to an
extravagance not easy to imagine; but he perceived my disorder.  He
entreated me to consider seriously of it; assured me that it was the
only way to preserve our mutual affection; that in this station we
might love as friends, with the utmost passion, and with a love of
relation untainted, free from our just reproaches, and free from other
people's suspicions; that he should ever acknowledge his happiness
owing to me; that he would be debtor to me as long as he lived, and
would be paying that debt as long as he had breath.  Thus he wrought me
up, in short, to a kind of hesitation in the matter; having the dangers
on one side represented in lively figures, and indeed, heightened by my
imagination of being turned out to the wide world a mere cast-off
whore, for it was no less, and perhaps exposed as such, with little to
provide for myself, with no friend, no acquaintance in the whole world,
out of that town, and there I could not pretend to stay.  All this
terrified me to the last degree, and he took care upon all occasions to
lay it home to me in the worst colours that it could be possible to be
drawn in.  On the other hand, he failed not to set forth the easy,
prosperous life which I was going to live.

He answered all that I could object from affection, and from former
engagements, with telling me the necessity that was before us of taking
other measures now; and as to his promises of marriage, the nature of
things, he said, had put an end to that, by the probability of my being
his brother's wife, before the time to which his promises all referred.

Thus, in a word, I may say, he reasoned me out of my reason; he
conquered all my arguments, and I began to see a danger that I was in,
which I had not considered of before, and that was, of being dropped by
both of them and left alone in the world to shift for myself.

This, and his persuasion, at length prevailed with me to consent,
though with so much reluctance, that it was easy to see I should go to
church like a bear to the stake.  I had some little apprehensions about
me, too, lest my new spouse, who, by the way, I had not the least
affection for, should be skillful enough to challenge me on another
account, upon our first coming to bed together.  But whether he did it
with design or not, I know not, but his elder brother took care to make
him very much fuddled before he went to bed, so that I had the
satisfaction of a drunken bedfellow the first night.  How he did it I
know not, but I concluded that he certainly contrived it, that his
brother might be able to make no judgment of the difference between a
maid and a married woman; nor did he ever entertain any notions of it,
or disturb his thoughts about it.

I should go back a little here to where I left off.  The elder brother
having thus managed me, his next business was to manage his mother, and
he never left till he had brought her to acquiesce and be passive in
the thing, even without acquainting the father, other than by post
letters; so that she consented to our marrying privately, and leaving
her to mange the father afterwards.

Then he cajoled with his brother, and persuaded him what service he had
done him, and how he had brought his mother to consent, which, though
true, was not indeed done to serve him, but to serve himself; but thus
diligently did he cheat him, and had the thanks of a faithful friend
for shifting off his whore into his brother's arms for a wife.  So
certainly does interest banish all manner of affection, and so
naturally do men give up honour and justice, humanity, and even
Christianity, to secure themselves.

I must now come back to brother Robin, as we always called him, who
having got his mother's consent, as above, came big with the news to
me, and told me the whole story of it, with a sincerity so visible,
that I must confess it grieved me that I must be the instrument to
abuse so honest a gentleman.  But there was no remedy; he would have
me, and I was not obliged to tell him that I was his brother's whore,
though I had no other way to put him off; so I came gradually into it,
to his satisfaction, and behold we were married.

Modesty forbids me to reveal the secrets of the marriage-bed, but
nothing could have happened more suitable to my circumstances than
that, as above, my husband was so fuddled when he came to bed, that he
could not remember in the morning whether he had had any conversation
with me or no, and I was obliged to tell him he had, though in reality
he had not, that I might be sure he could make to inquiry about
anything else.

It concerns the story in hand very little to enter into the further
particulars of the family, or of myself, for the five years that I
lived with this husband, only to observe that I had two children by
him, and that at the end of five years he died.  He had been really a
very good husband to me, and we lived very agreeably together; but as
he had not received much from them, and had in the little time he lived
acquired no great matters, so my circumstances were not great, nor was
I much mended by the match.  Indeed, I had preserved the elder
brother's bonds to me, to pay #500, which he offered me for my consent
to marry his brother; and this, with what I had saved of the money he
formerly gave me, about as much more by my husband, left me a widow
with about #1200 in my pocket.

My two children were, indeed, taken happily off my hands by my
husband's father and mother, and that, by the way, was all they got by
Mrs. Betty.

I confess I was not suitably affected with the loss of my husband, nor
indeed can I say that I ever loved him as I ought to have done, or as
was proportionable to the good usage I had from him, for he was a
tender, kind, good-humoured man as any woman could desire; but his
brother being so always in my sight, at least while we were in the
country, was a continual snare to me, and I never was in bed with my
husband but I wished myself in the arms of his brother; and though his
brother never offered me the least kindness that way after our
marriage, but carried it just as a brother out to do, yet it was
impossible for me to do so to him; in short, I committed adultery and
incest with him every day in my desires, which, without doubt, was as
effectually criminal in the nature of the guilt as if I had actually
done it.

Before my husband died his elder brother was married, and we, being
then removed to London, were written to by the old lady to come and be
at the wedding.  My husband went, but I pretended indisposition, and
that I could not possibly travel, so I stayed behind; for, in short, I
could not bear the sight of his being given to another woman, though I
knew I was never to have him myself.

I was now, as above, left loose to the world, and being still young and
handsome, as everybody said of me, and I assure you I thought myself
so, and with a tolerable fortune in my pocket, I put no small value
upon myself.  I was courted by several very considerable tradesmen, and
particularly very warmly by one, a linen-draper, at whose house, after
my husband's death, I took a lodging, his sister being my acquaintance.
Here I had all the liberty and all the opportunity to be gay and appear
in company that I could desire, my landlord's sister being one of the
maddest, gayest things alive, and not so much mistress of her virtue as
I thought at first she had been.  She brought me into a world of  wild
company, and even brought home several persons, such as she liked well
enough to gratify, to see her pretty widow, so she was pleased to call
me, and that name I got in a little time in public.  Now, as fame and
fools make an assembly, I was here wonderfully caressed, had abundance
of admirers, and such as called themselves lovers; but I found not one
fair proposal among them all.  As for their common design, that I
understood too well to be drawn into any more snares of that kind.  The
case was altered with me: I had money in my pocket, and had nothing to
say to them.  I had been tricked once by that cheat called love, but
the game was over;  I was resolved now to be married or nothing, and to
be well married or not at all.

I loved the company, indeed, of men of mirth and wit, men of gallantry
and figure, and was often entertained with such, as I was also with
others; but I found by just observation, that the brightest men came
upon the dullest errand--that is to say, the dullest as to what I aimed
at.  On the other hand, those who came with the best proposals were the
dullest and most disagreeable part of the world.  I was not averse to a
tradesman, but then I would have a tradesman, forsooth, that was
something of a gentleman too; that when my husband had a mind to carry
me to the court, or to the play, he might become a sword, and look as
like a gentleman as another man; and not be one that had the mark of
his apron-strings upon his coat, or the mark of his hat upon his
periwig; that should look as if he was set on to his sword, when his
sword was put on to him, and that carried his trade in his countenance.

Well, at last I found this amphibious creature, this land-water thing
called a gentleman-tradesman; and as a just plague upon my folly, I was
catched in the very snare which, as I might say, I laid for myself.  I
said for myself, for I was not trepanned, I confess, but I betrayed
myself.

This was a draper, too, for though my comrade would have brought me to
a bargain with her brother, yet when it came to the point, it was, it
seems, for a mistress, not a wife; and I kept true to this notion, that
a woman should never be kept for a mistress that had money to keep
herself.

Thus my pride, not my principle, my money, not my virtue, kept me
honest; though, as it proved, I found I had much better have been sold
by my she-comrade to her brother, than have sold myself as I did to a
tradesman that was rake, gentleman, shopkeeper, and beggar, all
together.

But I was hurried on (by my fancy to a gentleman) to ruin myself in the
grossest manner that every woman did; for my new husband coming to a
lump of money at once, fell into such a profusion of expense, that all
I had, and all he had before, if he had anything worth mentioning,
would not have held it out above one year.

He was very fond of me for about a quarter of a year, and what I got by
that was, that I had the pleasure of seeing a great deal of my money
spent upon myself, and, as I may say, had some of the spending it too.
'Come, my dear,' says he to me one day, 'shall we go and take a turn
into the country for about a week?' 'Ay, my dear,' says I, 'whither
would you go?'  'I care not whither,' says he, 'but I have a mind to
look like quality for a week.  We'll go to Oxford,' says he.  'How,'
says I, 'shall we go? I am no horsewoman, and 'tis too far for a
coach.' 'Too far!' says he; 'no place is too far for a coach-and-six.
If I carry you out, you shall travel like a duchess.'  'Hum,' says I,
'my dear, 'tis a frolic; but if you have a mind to it, I don't care.'
Well, the time was appointed, we had a rich coach, very good horses, a
coachman, postillion, and two footmen in very good liveries; a
gentleman on horseback, and a page with a feather in his hat upon
another horse.  The servants all called him my lord, and the
inn-keepers, you may be sure, did the like, and I was her honour the
Countess, and thus we traveled to Oxford, and a very pleasant journey
we had; for, give him his due, not a beggar alive knew better how to be
a lord than my husband.  We saw all the rarities at Oxford, talked with
two or three Fellows of colleges about putting out a young nephew, that
was left to his lordship's care, to the University, and of their being
his tutors.  We diverted ourselves with bantering several other poor
scholars, with hopes of being at least his lordship's chaplains and
putting on a scarf; and thus having lived like quality indeed, as to
expense, we went away for Northampton, and, in a word, in about twelve
days' ramble came home again, to the tune of about #93 expense.

Vanity is the perfection of a fop.  My husband had this excellence,
that he valued nothing of expense; and as his history, you may be sure,
has very little weight in it, 'tis enough to tell you that in about two
years and a quarter he broke, and was not so happy to get over into the
Mint, but got into a sponging-house, being arrested in an action too
heavy from him to give bail to, so he sent for me to come to him.

It was no surprise to me, for I had foreseen some time that all was
going to wreck, and had been taking care to reserve something if I
could, though it was not much, for myself.  But when he sent for me, he
behaved much better than I expected, and told me plainly he had played
the fool, and suffered himself to be surprised, which he might have
prevented; that now he foresaw he could not stand it, and therefore he
would have me go home, and in the night take away everything I had in
the house of any value, and secure it; and after that, he told me that
if I could get away one hundred or two hundred pounds in goods out of
the shop, I should do it; 'only,' says he, 'let me know nothing of it,
neither what you take nor whither you carry it; for as for me,' says
he, 'I am resolved to get out of this house and be gone; and if you
never hear of me more, my dear,' says he, 'I wish you well; I am only
sorry for the injury I have done you.'  He said some very handsome
things to me indeed at parting; for I told you he was a gentleman, and
that was all the benefit  I had of his being so; that he used me very
handsomely and with good manners upon all occasions, even to the last,
only spent all I had, and left me to rob the creditors for something to
subsist on.

However, I did as he bade me, that you may be sure; and having thus
taken my leave of him, I never saw him more, for he found means to
break out of the bailiff's house that night or the next, and go over
into France, and for the rest of the creditors scrambled for it as well
as they could.  How, I knew not, for I could come at no knowledge of
anything, more than this, that he came home about three o'clock in the
morning, caused the rest of his goods to be removed into the Mint, and
the shop to be shut up; and having raised what money he could get
together, he got over, as I said, to France, from whence I had one or
two letters from him, and no more.  I did not see him when he came
home, for he having given me such instructions as above, and I having
made the best of my time, I had no more business back again at the
house, not knowing but I might have been stopped there by the
creditors; for a commission of bankrupt being soon after issued, they
might have stopped me by orders from the commissioners.  But my
husband, having so dexterously got out of the bailiff's house by
letting himself down in a most desperate manner from almost the top of
the house to the top of another building, and leaping from thence,
which was almost two storeys, and which was enough indeed to have
broken his neck, he came home and got away his goods before the
creditors could come to seize; that is to say, before they could get
out the commission, and be ready to send their officers to take
possession.

My husband was so civil to me, for still I say he was much of a
gentleman, that in the first letter he wrote me from France, he let me
know where he had pawned twenty pieces of fine holland for #30, which
were really worth #90, and enclosed me the token and an order for the
taking them up, paying the money, which I did, and made in time above
#100 of them, having leisure to cut them and sell them, some and some,
to private families, as opportunity offered.

However, with all this, and all that I had secured before, I found,
upon casting things up, my case was very much altered, any my fortune
much lessened; for, including the hollands and a parcel of fine
muslins, which I carried off before, and some plate, and other things,
I found I could hardly muster up #500; and my condition was very odd,
for though I had no child (I had had one by my gentleman draper, but it
was buried), yet I was a widow bewitched; I had a husband and no
husband, and I could not pretend to marry again, though I knew well
enough my husband would never see England any more, if he lived fifty
years.  Thus, I say, I was limited from marriage, what offer might
soever be made me; and I had not one friend to advise with in the
condition I was in, least not one I durst trust the secret of my
circumstances to, for if the commissioners were to have been informed
where I was, I should have been fetched up and examined upon oath, and
all I have saved be taken away from me.

Upon these apprehensions, the first thing I did was to go quite out of
my knowledge, and go by another name.  This I did effectually, for I
went into the Mint too, took lodgings in a very private place, dressed
up in the habit of a widow, and called myself Mrs. Flanders.

Here, however, I concealed myself, and though my new acquaintances knew
nothing of me, yet I soon got a great deal of company about me; and
whether it be that women are scarce among the sorts of people that
generally are to be found there, or that some consolations in the
miseries of the place are more requisite than on other occasions, I
soon found an agreeable woman was exceedingly valuable among the sons
of affliction there, and that those that wanted money to pay half a
crown on the pound to their creditors, and that run in debt at the sign
of the Bull for their dinners, would yet find money for a supper, if
they liked the woman.

However, I kept myself safe yet, though I began, like my Lord
Rochester's mistress, that loved his company, but would not admit him
farther, to have the scandal of a whore, without the joy; and upon this
score, tired with the place, and indeed with the company too, I began
to think of removing.

It was indeed a subject of strange reflection to me to see men who were
overwhelmed in perplexed circumstances, who were reduced some degrees
below being ruined, whose families were objects of their own terror and
other people's charity, yet while a penny lasted, nay, even beyond it,
endeavouring to drown themselves, labouring to forget former things,
which now it was the proper time to remember, making more work for
repentance, and sinning on, as a remedy for sin past.

But it is none of my talent to preach; these men were too wicked, even
for me.  There was something horrid and absurd in their way of sinning,
for it was all a force even upon themselves; they did not only act
against conscience, but against nature; they put a rape upon their
temper to drown the reflections, which their circumstances continually
gave them; and nothing was more easy than to see how sighs would
interrupt their songs, and paleness and anguish sit upon their brows,
in spite of the forced smiles they put on; nay, sometimes it would
break out at their very mouths when they had parted with their money
for a lewd treat or a wicked embrace.  I have heard them, turning
about, fetch a deep sigh, and cry, 'What a dog am I!  Well, Betty, my
dear, I'll drink thy health, though'; meaning the honest wife, that
perhaps had not a half-crown for herself and three or four children.
The next morning they are at their penitentials again; and perhaps the
poor weeping wife comes over to him, either brings him some account of
what his creditors are doing, and how she and the children are turned
out of doors, or some other dreadful news; and this adds to his
self-reproaches; but when he has thought and pored on it till he is
almost mad, having no principles to support him, nothing within him or
above him to comfort him, but finding it all darkness on every side, he
flies to the same relief again, viz. to drink it away, debauch it away,
and falling into company of men in just the same condition with
himself, he repeats the crime, and thus he goes every day one step
onward of his way to destruction.

I was not wicked enough for such fellows as these yet.  On the
contrary, I began to consider here very seriously what I had to do; how
things stood with me, and what course I ought to take.  I knew I had no
friends, no, not one friend or relation in the world; and that little I
had left apparently wasted, which when it was gone, I saw nothing but
misery and starving was before me.  Upon these considerations, I say,
and filled with horror at the place I was in, and the dreadful objects
which I had always before me, I resolved to be gone.

I had made an acquaintance with a very sober, good sort of a woman, who
was a widow too, like me, but in better circumstances.  Her husband had
been a captain of a merchant ship, and having had the misfortune to be
cast away coming home on a voyage from the West Indies, which would
have been very profitable if he had come safe, was so reduced by the
loss, that though he had saved his life then, it broke his heart, and
killed him afterwards; and his widow, being pursued by the creditors,
was forced to take shelter in the Mint.  She soon made things up with
the help of friends, and was at liberty again; and finding that I
rather was there to be concealed, than by any particular prosecutions
and finding also that I agreed with her, or rather she with me, in a
just abhorrence of the place and of the company, she invited to go home
with her till I could put myself in some posture of settling in the
world to my mind; withal telling me, that it was ten to one but some
good captain of a ship might take a fancy to me, and court me, in that
part of the town where she lived.

I accepted her offer, and was with her half a year, and should have
been longer, but in that interval what she proposed to me happened to
herself, and she married very much to her advantage.  But whose fortune
soever was upon the increase, mine seemed to be upon the wane, and I
found nothing present, except two or three boatswains, or such fellows,
but as for the commanders, they were generally of two sorts:  1. Such
as, having good business, that is to say, a good ship, resolved not to
marry but with advantage, that is, with a good fortune; 2. Such as,
being out of employ, wanted a wife to help them to a ship; I mean (1) a
wife who, having some money, could enable them to hold, as they call
it, a good part of a ship themselves, so to encourage owners to come
in; or (2) a wife who, if she had not money, had friends who were
concerned in shipping, and so could help to put the young man into a
good ship, which to them is as good as a portion; and neither of these
was my case, so I looked like one that was to lie on hand.

This knowledge I soon learned by experience, viz. that the state of
things was altered as to  matrimony, and that I was not to expect at
London what I had found in the country:  that marriages were here the
consequences of politic schemes for forming interests, and carrying on
business, and that Love had no share, or but very little, in the matter.

That as my sister-in-law at Colchester had said, beauty, wit, manners,
sense, good humour, good behaviour, education, virtue, piety, or any
other qualification, whether of body or mind, had no power to
recommend; that money only made a woman agreeable; that men chose
mistresses indeed by the gust of their affection, and it was requisite
to a whore to be handsome, well-shaped, have a good mien and a graceful
behaviour; but that for a wife, no deformity would shock the fancy, no
ill qualities the judgment; the money was the thing; the portion was
neither crooked nor monstrous, but the money was always agreeable,
whatever the wife was.

On the other hand, as the market ran very unhappily on the men's side,
I found the women had lost the privilege of saying No; that it was a
favour now for a woman to have the Question asked, and if any young
lady had so much arrogance as to counterfeit a negative, she never had
the opportunity given her of denying twice, much less of recovering
that false step, and accepting what she had but seemed to decline.  The
men had such choice everywhere, that the case of the women was very
unhappy; for they seemed to ply at every door, and if the man was by
great chance refused at one house, he was sure to be received at the
next.

Besides this, I observed that the men made no scruple to set themselves
out, and to go a-fortunehunting, as they call it, when they had really
no fortune themselves to demand it, or merit to deserve it; and that
they carried it so high, that a woman was scarce allowed to inquire
after the character or estate of the person that pretended to her.
This I had an example of, in a young lady in the next house to me, and
with whom I had contracted an intimacy; she was courted by a young
captain, and though she had near #2000 to her fortune, she did but
inquire of some of his neighbours about his character, his morals, or
substance, and he took occasion at the next visit to let her know,
truly, that he took it very ill, and that he should not give her the
trouble of his visits any more.  I heard of it, and I had begun my
acquaintance with her, I went to see her upon it.  She entered into a
close conversation with me about it, and unbosomed herself very freely.
I perceived presently that though she thought herself very ill used,
yet she had no power to resent it, and was exceedingly piqued that she
had lost him, and particularly that another of  less fortune had gained
him.

I fortified her mind against such a meanness, as I called it; I told
her, that as low as I was in the world, I would have despised a man
that should think I ought to take him upon his own recommendation only,
without having the liberty to inform myself of his fortune and of his
character; also I told her, that as she had a good fortune, she had no
need to stoop to the disaster of the time; that it was enough that the
men could insult us that had but little money to recommend us, but if
she suffered such an affront to pass upon her without resenting it, she
would be rendered low-prized upon all occasions, and would be the
contempt of all the women in that part of the town; that a woman can
never want an opportunity to be revenged of a man that has used her
ill, and that there were ways enough to humble such a fellow as that,
or else certainly women were the most unhappy creatures in the world.

I found she was very well pleased with the discourse, and she told me
seriously that she would be very glad to make him sensible of her just
resentment, and either to bring him on again, or have the satisfaction
of her revenge being as public as possible.

I told her, that if she would take my advice, I would tell her how she
should obtain her wishes in both those things, and that I would engage
I would bring the man to her door again, and make him beg to be let in.
She smiled at that, and soon let me see, that if he came to her door,
her resentment was not so great as to give her leave to let him stand
long there.

However, she listened very willingly to my offer of advice; so I told
her that the first thing she ought to do was a piece of justice to
herself, namely, that whereas she had been told by several people that
he had reported among the ladies that he had left her, and pretended to
give the advantage of the negative to himself, she should take care to
have it well spread among the women--which she could not fail of an
opportunity to do in a neighbourhood so addicted to family news as that
she live in was--that she had inquired into his circumstances, and
found he was not the man as to estate he pretended to be.  'Let them be
told, madam,' said I, 'that you had been well informed that he was not
the man that you expected, and that you thought it was not safe to
meddle with him; that you heard he was of an ill temper, and that he
boasted how he had used the women ill upon many occasions, and that
particularly he was debauched in his morals', etc.  The last of which,
indeed, had some truth in it; but at the same time I did not find that
she seemed to like him much the worse for that part.

As I had put this into her head, she came most readily into it.
Immediately she went to work to find instruments, and she had very
little difficulty in the search, for telling her story in general to a
couple of gossips in the neighbourhood, it was the chat of the
tea-table all over that part of the town, and I met with it wherever I
visited; also, as it was known that I was acquainted with the young
lady herself, my opinion was asked very often, and I confirmed it with
all the necessary aggravations, and set out his character in the
blackest colours; but then as a piece of secret intelligence, I added,
as what the other gossips knew nothing of, viz. that I had heard he was
in very bad circumstances; that he was under a necessity of a fortune
to support his interest with the owners of the ship he commanded; that
his own part was not paid for, and if it was not paid quickly, his
owners would put him out of the ship, and his chief mate was likely to
command it, who offered to buy that part which the captain had promised
to take.

I added, for I confess I was heartily piqued at the rogue, as I called
him, that I had heard a rumour, too, that he had a wife alive at
Plymouth, and another in the West Indies, a thing which they all knew
was not very uncommon for such kind of gentlemen.

This worked as we both desire it, for presently the young lady next
door, who had a father and mother that governed both her and her
fortune, was shut up, and her father forbid him the house.  Also in one
place more where he went, the woman had the courage, however strange it
was, to say No; and he could try nowhere but he was reproached with his
pride, and that he pretended not to give the women leave to inquire
into his character, and the like.

Well, by this time he began to be sensible of his mistake; and having
alarmed all the women on that side of the water, he went over to
Ratcliff, and got access to some of the ladies there; but though the
young women there too were, according to the fate of the day, pretty
willing to be asked, yet such was his ill-luck, that his character
followed him over the water and his good name was much the same there
as it was on our side; so that though he might have had wives enough,
yet it did not happen among the women that had good fortunes, which was
what he wanted.

But this was not all; she very ingeniously managed another thing
herself, for she got a young gentleman, who as a relation, and was
indeed a married man, to come and visit her two or three times a week
in a very fine chariot and good liveries, and her two agents, and I
also, presently spread a report all over, that this gentleman came to
court her; that he was a gentleman of a #1000 a year, and that he was
fallen in love with her, and that she was going to her aunt's in the
city, because it was inconvenient for the gentleman to come to her with
his coach in Redriff, the streets being so narrow and difficult.

This took immediately.  The captain was laughed at in all companies,
and was ready to hang himself.  He tried all the ways possible to come
at her again, and wrote the most passionate letters to her in the
world, excusing his former rashness; and in short, by great
application, obtained leave to wait on her again, as he said, to clear
his reputation.


At this meeting she had her full revenge of him; for she told him she
wondered what he took her to be, that she should admit any man to a
treaty of so much consequence as that to marriage, without inquiring
very well into his circumstances; that if he thought she was to be
huffed into wedlock, and that she was in the same circumstances which
her neighbours might be in, viz. to take up with the first good
Christian that came, he was mistaken; that, in a word, his character
was really bad, or he was very ill beholden to his neighbours; and that
unless he could clear up some points, in which she had justly been
prejudiced, she had no more to say to him, but to do herself justice,
and give him the satisfaction of knowing that she was not afraid to say
No, either to him or any man else.

With that she told him what she had heard, or rather raised herself by
my means, of his character; his not having paid for the part he
pretended to own of the ship he commanded; of the resolution of his
owners to put him out of the command, and to put his mate in his stead;
and of the scandal raised on his morals; his having been reproached
with such-and-such women, and having a wife at Plymouth and in the West
Indies, and the like; and she asked him whether he could deny that she
had good reason, if these things were not cleared up, to refuse him,
and in the meantime to insist upon having satisfaction in points to
significant as they were.

He was so confounded at her discourse that he could not answer a word,
and she almost began to believe that all was true, by his disorder,
though at the same time she knew that she had been the raiser of all
those reports herself.

After some time he recovered himself a little, and from that time
became the most humble, the most modest, and most importunate man alive
in his courtship.

She carried her jest on a great way.  She asked him, if he thought she
was so at her last shift that she could or ought to bear such
treatment, and if he did not see that she did not want those who
thought it worth their while to come farther to her than he did;
meaning the gentleman whom she had brought to visit her by way of sham.

She brought him by these tricks to submit to all possible measures to
satisfy her, as well of his circumstances as of his behaviour.  He
brought her undeniable evidence of his having paid for his part of the
ship; he brought her certificates from his owners, that the report of
their intending to remove him from the command of the ship and put his
chief mate in was false and groundless; in short, he was quite the
reverse of what he was before.

Thus I convinced her, that if the men made their advantage of our sex
in the affair of marriage, upon the supposition of there being such
choice to be had, and of the women being so easy, it was only owing to
this, that the women wanted courage to maintain their ground and to
play their part; and that, according to my Lord Rochester,

     'A woman's ne'er so ruined but she can
     Revenge herself on her undoer, Man.'

After these things this young lady played her part so well, that though
she resolved to have him, and that indeed having him was the main bent
of her design, yet she made his obtaining her be to him the most
difficult thing in the world; and this she did, not by a haughty
reserved carriage, but by a just policy, turning the tables upon him,
and playing back upon him his own game; for as he pretended, by a kind
of lofty carriage, to place himself above the occasion of a character,
and to make inquiring into his character a kind of an affront to him,
she broke with him upon that subject, and at the same time that she
make him submit to all possible inquiry after his affairs, she
apparently shut the door against his looking into her own.

It was enough to him to obtain her for a wife.  As to what she had, she
told him plainly, that as he knew her circumstances, it was but just
she should know his; and though at the same time he had only known her
circumstances by common fame, yet he had made so many protestations of
his passion for her, that he could ask no more but her hand to his
grand request, and the like ramble according to the custom of lovers.
In short, he left himself no room to ask any more questions about her
estate, and she took the advantage of it like a prudent woman, for she
placed part of her fortune so in trustees, without letting him know
anything of it, that it was quite out of his reach, and made him be
very well content with the rest.

It is true she was pretty well besides, that is to say, she had about
#1400 in money, which she gave him; and the other, after some time, she
brought to light as a perquisite to herself, which he was to accept as
a mighty favour, seeing though it was not to be his, it might ease him
in the article of her particular expenses; and I must add, that by this
conduct the gentleman himself became not only the more humble in his
applications to her to obtain her, but also was much the more an
obliging husband to her when he had her.  I cannot but remind the
ladies here how much they place themselves below the common station of
a wife, which, if I may be allowed not to be partial, is low enough
already; I say, they place themselves below their common station, and
prepare their own mortifications, by their submitting so to be insulted
by the men beforehand, which I confess I see no necessity of.

This relation may serve, therefore, to let the ladies see that the
advantage is not so much on the other side as the men think it is; and
though it may be true that the men have but too much choice among us,
and that some women may be found who will dishonour themselves, be
cheap, and easy to come at, and will scarce wait to be asked, yet if
they will have women, as I may say, worth having, they may find them as
uncomeatable as ever and that those that are otherwise are a sort of
people that have such deficiencies, when had, as rather recommend the
ladies that are difficult than encourage the men to go on with their
easy courtship, and expect wives equally valuable that will come at
first call.

Nothing is more certain than that the ladies always gain of the men by
keeping their ground, and letting their pretended lovers see they can
resent being slighted, and that they are not afraid of saying No.
They, I observe, insult us mightily with telling us of the number of
women; that the wars, and the sea, and trade, and other incidents have
carried the men so much away, that there is no proportion between the
numbers of the sexes, and therefore the women have the disadvantage;
but I am far from granting that the number of women is so great, or the
number of men so small; but if they will have me tell the truth, the
disadvantage of the women is a terrible scandal upon the men, and it
lies here, and here only; namely, that the age is so wicked, and the
sex so debauched, that, in short, the number of such men as an honest
woman ought to meddle with is small indeed, and it is but here and
there that a man is to be found who is fit for a woman to venture upon.

But the consequence even of that too amounts to no more than this, that
women ought to be the more nice; for how do we know the just character
of the man that makes the offer?  To say that the woman should be the
more easy on this occasion, is to say we should be the forwarder to
venture because of the greatness of the danger, which, in my way of
reasoning, is very absurd.

On the contrary, the women have ten thousand times the more reason to
be wary and backward, by how much the hazard of being betrayed is the
greater; and would the ladies consider this, and act the wary part,
they would discover every cheat that offered; for, in short, the lives
of very few men nowadays will bear a character; and if the ladies do
but make a little inquiry, they will soon be able to distinguish the
men and deliver themselves.  As for women that do not think their own
safety worth their thought, that, impatient of their perfect state,
resolve, as they call it, to take the first good Christian that comes,
that run into matrimony as a horse rushes into the battle, I can say
nothing to them but this, that they are a sort of ladies that are to be
prayed for among the rest of distempered people, and to me they look
like people that venture their whole estates in a lottery where there
is a hundred thousand blanks to one prize.

No man of common-sense will value a woman the less for not giving up
herself at the first attack, or for accepting his proposal without
inquiring into his person or character; on the contrary, he must think
her the weakest of all creatures in the world, as the rate of men now
goes.  In short, he must have a very contemptible opinion of her
capacities, nay, every of her understanding, that, having but one case
of her life, shall call that life away at once, and make matrimony,
like death, be a leap in the dark.

I would fain have the conduct of my sex a little regulated in this
particular, which is the thing in which, of all the parts of life, I
think at this time we suffer most in; 'tis nothing but lack of courage,
the fear of not being married at all, and of that frightful state of
life called an old maid, of which I have a story to tell by itself.
This, I say, is the woman's snare; but would the ladies once but get
above that fear and manage rightly, they would more certainly avoid it
by standing their ground, in a case so absolutely necessary to their
felicity, that by exposing themselves as they do; and if they did not
marry so soon as they may do otherwise, they would make themselves
amends by marrying safer.  She is always married too soon who gets a
bad husband, and she is never married too late who gets a good one; in
a word, there is no woman, deformity or lost reputation excepted, but
if she manages well, may be married safely one time or other; but if
she precipitates herself, it is ten thousand to one but she is undone.

But I come now to my own case, in which there was at this time no
little nicety.  The circumstances I was in made the offer of a good
husband the most necessary thing in the world to me, but I found soon
that to be made cheap and easy was not the way.  It soon began to be
found that the widow had no fortune, and to say this was to say all
that was ill of me, for I began to be dropped in all the discourses of
matrimony.  Being well-bred, handsome, witty, modest, and agreeable;
all which I had allowed to my character--whether justly or no is not
the purpose--I say, all these would not do without the dross, which way
now become more valuable than virtue itself.  In short, the widow, they
said, had no money.

I resolved, therefore, as to the state of my present circumstances,
that it was absolutely necessary to change my station, and make a new
appearance in some other place where I was not known, and even to pass
by another name if I found occasion.

I communicated my thoughts to my intimate friend, the captain's lady,
whom I had so faithfully served in her case with the captain, and who
was as ready to serve me in the same kind as I could desire.  I made no
scruple to lay my circumstances open to her; my stock was but low, for
I had made but about #540 at the close of my last affair, and I had
wasted some of that; however, I had about #460 left, a great many very
rich clothes, a gold watch, and some jewels, though of no extraordinary
value, and about #30 or #40 left in linen not disposed of.

My dear and faithful friend, the captain's wife, was so sensible of the
service I had done her in the affair above, that she was not only a
steady friend to me, but, knowing my circumstances, she frequently made
me presents as money came into her hands, such as fully amounted to a
maintenance, so that I spent none of my own; and at last she made this
unhappy proposal to me, viz. that as we had observed, as above, how the
men made no scruple to set themselves out as persons meriting a woman
of fortune, when they had really no fortune of their own, it was but
just to deal with them in their own way and, if it was possible, to
deceive the deceiver.

The captain's lady, in short, put this project into my head, and told
me if I would be ruled by her I should certainly get a husband of
fortune, without leaving him any room to reproach me with want of my
own.  I told her, as I had reason to do, that I would give up myself
wholly to her directions, and that I would have neither tongue to speak
nor feet to step in that affair but as she should direct me, depending
that she would extricate me out of every difficulty she brought me
into, which she said she would answer for.

The first step she put me upon was to call her cousin, and go to a
relation's house of hers in the country, where she directed me, and
where she brought her husband to visit me; and calling me cousin, she
worked matters so about, that her husband and she together invited me
most passionately to come to town and be with them, for they now live
in a quite different place from where they were before.  In the next
place, she tells her husband that I had at least #1500 fortune, and
that after some of my relations I was like to have a great deal more.

It was enough to tell her husband this; there needed nothing on my
side.  I was but to sit still and wait the event, for it presently went
all over the neighbourhood that the young widow at Captain ----'s was a
fortune, that she had at least #1500, and perhaps a great deal more,
and that the captain said so; and if the captain was asked at any time
about me, he made no scruple to affirm it, though he knew not one word
of the matter, other  than that his wife had told him so; and in this
he thought no harm, for he really believed it to be so, because he had
it from his wife:  so slender a foundation will those fellows build
upon, if they do but think there is a fortune in the game.  With the
reputation of this fortune, I presently found myself blessed with
admirers enough, and that I had my choice of men, as scarce as they
said they were, which, by the way, confirms what I was saying before.
This being my case, I, who had a subtle game to play, had nothing now
to do but to single out from them all the properest man that might be
for my purpose; that is to say, the man who was most likely to depend
upon the hearsay of a fortune, and not inquire too far into the
particulars; and unless I did this I did nothing, for my case would not
bear much inquiry.

I picked out my man without much difficulty, by the judgment I made of
his way of courting me.  I had let him run on with his protestations
and oaths that he loved me above all the world; that if I would make
him happy, that was enough; all which I knew was upon supposition, nay,
it was upon a full satisfaction, that I was very rich, though I never
told him a word of it myself.

This was my man; but I was to try him to the bottom, and indeed in that
consisted my safety; for if he baulked, I knew I was undone, as surely
as he was undone if he took me; and if I did not make some scruple
about his fortune, it was the way to lead him to raise some about mine;
and first, therefore, I pretended on all occasions to doubt his
sincerity, and told him, perhaps he only courted me for my fortune.  He
stopped my mouth in that part with the thunder of his protestations, as
above,  but still I pretended to doubt.

One morning he pulls off his diamond ring, and writes upon the glass of
the sash in my chamber this line--

     'You I love, and you alone.'

I read it, and asked him to lend me his ring, with which I wrote under
it, thus--

    'And so in love says every one.'

He takes his ring again, and writes another line thus--

     'Virtue alone is an estate.'

I borrowed it again, and I wrote under it--

     'But money's virtue, gold is fate.'

He coloured as red as fire to see me turn so quick upon him, and in a
kind of a rage told me he would conquer me, and writes again thus--

     'I scorn your gold, and yet I love.'

I ventured all upon the last cast of poetry, as you'll see, for I wrote
boldly under his last--

     'I'm poor:  let's see how kind you'll prove.'

This was a sad truth to me; whether he believed me or no, I could not
tell; I supposed then that he did not.  However, he flew to me, took me
in his arms, and, kissing me very eagerly, and with the greatest
passion imaginable, he held me fast till he called for a pen and ink,
and then told me he could not wait the tedious writing on the glass,
but, pulling out a piece of paper, he began and wrote again--

     'Be mine, with all your poverty.'

I took his pen, and followed him immediately, thus--

     'Yet secretly you hope I lie.'

He told me that was unkind, because it was not just, and that I put him
upon contradicting me, which did not consist with good manners, any
more than with his affection; and therefore, since I had insensibly
drawn him into this poetical scribble, he begged I would not oblige him
to break it off; so he writes again--

     'Let love alone be our debate.'

I wrote again--

     'She loves enough that does not hate.'


This he took for a favour, and so laid down the cudgels, that is to
say, the pen; I say, he took if for a favour, and a mighty one it was,
if he had known all.  However, he took it as I meant it, that is, to
let him think I was inclined to go on with him, as indeed I had all the
reason in the world to do, for he was the best-humoured, merry sort of
a fellow that I ever met with, and I often reflected on myself how
doubly criminal it was to deceive such a man; but that necessity, which
pressed me to a settlement suitable to my condition, was my authority
for it; and certainly his affection to me, and the goodness of his
temper, however they might argue against using him ill, yet they
strongly argued to me that he would better take the disappointment than
some fiery-tempered wretch, who might have nothing to recommend him but
those passions which would serve only to make a woman miserable all her
days.

Besides, though I jested with him (as he supposed it) so often about my
poverty, yet, when he found it to be true, he had foreclosed all manner
of objection, seeing, whether he was in jest or in earnest, he had
declared he took me without any regard to my portion, and, whether I
was in jest or in earnest, I had declared myself to be very poor; so
that, in a word, I had him fast both ways; and though he might say
afterwards he was cheated, yet he could never say that I had cheated
him.

He pursued me close after this, and as I saw there was no need to fear
losing him, I played the indifferent part with him longer than prudence
might otherwise have dictated to me.  But I considered how much this
caution and indifference would give me the advantage over him, when I
should come to be under the necessity of owning my own circumstances to
him; and I managed it the more warily, because I found he inferred from
thence, as indeed he ought to do, that I either had the more money or
the more judgment, and would not venture at all.

I took the freedom one day, after we had talked pretty close to the
subject, to tell him that it was true I had received the compliment of
a lover from him, namely, that he would take me without inquiring into
my fortune, and I would make him a suitable return in this, viz. that I
would make as little inquiry into his as consisted with reason, but I
hoped he would allow me to ask a few questions, which he would answer
or not as he thought fit; and that I would not be offended if he did
not answer me at all; one of these questions related to our manner of
living, and the place where, because I had heard he had a great
plantation in Virginia, and that he had talked of going to live there,
and I told him I did not care to be transported.

He began from this discourse to let me voluntarily into all his
affairs, and to tell me in a frank, open way all his circumstances, by
which I found he was very well to pass in the world; but that great
part of his estate consisted of three plantations, which he had in
Virginia, which brought him in a very good income, generally speaking,
to the tune of #300, a year, but that if he was to live upon them,
would bring him in four times as much.  'Very well,' thought I; 'you
shall carry me thither as soon as you please, though I won't tell you
so beforehand.'

I jested with him extremely about the figure he would make in Virginia;
but I found he would do anything I desired, though he did not seem glad
to have me undervalue his plantations, so I turned my tale.  I told him
I had good reason not to go there to live, because if his plantations
were worth so much there, I had not a fortune suitable to a gentleman
of #1200 a year, as he said his estate would be.

He replied generously, he did not ask what my fortune was; he had told
me from the beginning he would not, and he would be as good as his
word; but whatever it was, he assured me he would never desire me to go
to Virginia with him, or go thither himself without me, unless I was
perfectly willing, and made it my choice.

All this, you may be sure, was as I wished, and indeed nothing could
have happened more perfectly agreeable.  I carried it on as far as this
with a sort of indifferency that he often wondered at, more than at
first, but which was the only support of his courtship; and I mention
it the rather to intimate again to the ladies that nothing but want of
courage for such an indifferency makes our sex so cheap, and prepares
them to be ill-used as they are; would they venture the loss of a
pretending fop now and then, who carries it high upon the point of his
own merit, they would certainly be less slighted, and courted more.
Had I discovered really and truly what my great fortune was, and that
in all I had not full #500 when he expected #1500, yet I had hooked him
so fast, and played him so long, that I was satisfied he would have had
me in my worst circumstances; and indeed it was less a surprise to him
when he learned the truth than it would have been, because having not
the least blame to lay on me, who had carried it with an air of
indifference to the last, he would not say one word, except that indeed
he thought it had been more, but that if it had been less he did not
repent his bargain; only that he should not be able to maintain me so
well as he intended.

In short, we were married, and very happily married on my side, I
assure you, as to the man; for he was the best-humoured man that every
woman had, but his circumstances were not so good as I imagined, as, on
the other hand, he had not bettered himself by marrying so much as he
expected.

When we were married, I was shrewdly put to it to bring him that little
stock I had, and to let him see it was no more; but there was a
necessity for it, so I took my opportunity one day when we were alone,
to enter into a short dialogue with him about it.  'My dear,' said I,
'we have been married a fortnight; is it not time to let you know
whether you have got a wife with something or with nothing?'  'Your own
time for that, my dear,' says he; 'I am satisfied that I have got the
wife I love; I have not troubled you much,' says he, 'with my inquiry
after it.'

'That's true,' says I, 'but I have a great difficulty upon me about it,
which I scarce know how to manage.'

'What's that, m' dear?' says he.

'Why,' says I, ''tis a little hard upon me, and 'tis harder upon you.
I am told that Captain ----' (meaning my friend's husband) 'has told
you I had a great deal more money than I ever pretended to have, and I
am sure I never employed him to do so.'

'Well,' says he, 'Captain ---- may have told me so, but what then?  If
you have not so much, that may lie at his door, but you never told me
what you had, so I have no reason to blame you if you have nothing at
all.'

'That's is so just,' said I, 'and so generous, that it makes my having
but a little a double affliction to me.'

'The less you have, my dear,' says he, 'the worse for us both; but I
hope your affliction you speak of is not caused for fear I should be
unkind to you, for want of a portion.  No, no, if you have nothing,
tell me plainly, and at once; I may perhaps tell the captain he has
cheated me, but I can never say you have cheated me, for did you not
give it under your hand that you were poor?  and so I ought to expect
you to be.'

'Well,' said I, 'my dear, I am glad I have not been concerned in
deceiving you before marriage.  If I deceive you since, 'tis ne'er the
worse; that I am poor is too true, but not so poor as to have nothing
neither'; so I pulled out some bank bills, and gave him about #160.
'There's something, my dear,' said I, 'and not quite all neither.'

I had brought him so near to expecting nothing, by what I had said
before, that the money, though the sum was small in itself, was doubly
welcome to him; he owned it was more than he looked for, and that he
did not question by my discourse to him, but that my fine clothes, gold
watch, and a diamond ring or two, had been all my fortune.

I let him please himself with that #160 two or three days, and then,
having been abroad that day, and as if I had  been to fetch it, I
brought him #100 more home in gold, and told him there was a little
more portion for him; and, in short, in about a week more I brought him
#180 more, and about #60 in linen, which I made him believe I had been
obliged to take with the #100 which I gave him in gold, as a
composition for a debt of #600, being little more than five shillings
in the pound, and overvalued too.

'And now, my dear,' says I to him, 'I am very sorry to tell you, that
there is all, and that I have given you my whole fortune.' I added,
that if the person who had my #600 had not abused me, I had been worth
#1000 to him, but that as it was, I had been faithful to him, and
reserved nothing to myself, but if it had been more he should have had
it.

He was so obliged by the manner, and so pleased with the sum, for he
had been in a terrible fright lest it had been nothing at all, that he
accepted it very thankfully.  And thus I got over the fraud of passing
for a fortune without money, and cheating a man into marrying me on
pretence of a fortune; which, by the way, I take to be one of the most
dangerous steps a woman can take, and in which she runs the most hazard
of being ill-used afterwards.

My husband, to give him his due, was a man of infinite good nature, but
he was no fool; and finding his income not suited to the manner of
living which he had intended, if I had brought him what he expected,
and being under a disappointment in his return of his plantations in
Virginia, he discovered many times his inclination of going over to
Virginia, to live upon his own; and often would be magnifying the way
of living there, how cheap, how plentiful, how pleasant, and the like.

I began presently to understand this meaning, and I took him up very
plainly one morning, and told him that I did so; that I found his
estate turned to no account at this distance, compared to what it would
do if he lived upon the spot, and that I found he had a mind to go and
live there; and I added, that I was sensible he had been disappointed
in a wife, and that finding his expectations not answered that way, I
could do no less, to make him amends, than tell him that I was very
willing to go over to Virginia with him and live there.

He said a thousand kind things to me upon the subject of my making such
a proposal to him.  He told me, that however he was disappointed in his
expectations of a fortune, he was not disappointed in a wife, and that
I was all to him that a wife could be, and he was more than satisfied
on the whole when the particulars were put together, but that this
offer was so kind, that it was more than he could express.

To bring the story short, we agreed to go.  He told me that he had a
very good house there, that it was well furnished, that his mother was
alive and lived in it, and one sister, which was all the relations he
had; that as soon as he came there, his mother would remove to another
house, which was her own for life, and his after her decease; so that I
should have all the house to myself; and I found all this to be exactly
as he had said.

To make this part of the story short, we put on board the ship which we
went in, a large quantity of good furniture for our house, with stores
of linen and other necessaries, and a good cargo for sale, and away we
went.

To give an account of the manner of our voyage, which was long and full
of dangers, is out of my way; I kept no journal, neither did my
husband.  All that I can say is, that after a terrible passage,
frighted twice with dreadful storms, and once with what was still more
terrible, I mean a pirate who came on board and took away almost all
our provisions; and which would have been beyond all to me, they had
once taken my husband to go along with them, but by entreaties were
prevailed with to leave him;--I say, after all these terrible things,
we arrived in York River in Virginia, and coming to our plantation, we
were received with all the demonstrations of tenderness and affection,
by my husband's mother, that were possible to be expressed.

We lived here all together, my mother-in-law, at my entreaty,
continuing in the house, for she was too kind a mother to be parted
with; my husband likewise continued the same as at first, and I thought
myself the happiest creature alive, when an odd and surprising event
put an end to all that felicity in a moment, and rendered my condition
the most uncomfortable, if not the most miserable, in the world.

My mother was a mighty cheerful, good-humoured old woman --I may call
her old woman, for her son was above thirty; I say she was very
pleasant, good company, and used to entertain me, in particular, with
abundance of stories to divert me, as well of  the country we were in
as of the people.

Among the rest, she often told me how the greatest part of the
inhabitants of the colony came thither in very indifferent
circumstances from England; that, generally speaking, they were of two
sorts; either, first, such as were brought over by masters of ships to
be sold as servants.  'Such as we call them, my dear,' says she, 'but
they are more properly called slaves.' Or, secondly, such as are
transported from Newgate and other prisons, after having been found
guilty of felony and other crimes punishable with death.

'When they come here,' says she, 'we make no difference; the planters
buy them, and they work together in the field till their time is out.
When 'tis expired,' said she, 'they have encouragement given them to
plant for themselves; for they have a certain number of acres of land
allotted them by the country, and they go to work to clear and cure the
land, and then to plant it with tobacco and corn for their own use; and
as the tradesmen and merchants will trust them with tools and clothes
and other necessaries, upon the credit of their crop before it is
grown, so they again plant every year a little more than the year
before, and so buy whatever they want with the crop that is before them.

'Hence, child,' says she, 'man a Newgate-bird becomes a great man, and
we have,' continued she, 'several justices of the peace, officers of
the trained bands, and magistrates of the towns they live in, that have
been burnt in the hand.'

She was going on with that part of the story, when her own part in it
interrupted her, and with a great deal of good-humoured confidence she
told me she was one of the second sort of inhabitants herself; that she
came away openly, having ventured too far in a particular case, so that
she was become a criminal.  'And here's the mark of it, child,' says
she; and, pulling off her glove, 'look ye here,' says she, turning up
the palm of her hand, and showed me a very fine white arm and hand, but
branded in the inside of the hand, as in such cases it must be.

This story was very moving to me, but my mother, smiling, said, 'You
need not think a thing strange, daughter, for as I told you, some of
the best men in this country are burnt in the hand, and they are not
ashamed to own it.  There's Major ----,' says she, 'he was an eminent
pickpocket; there's Justice Ba----r, was a shoplifter, and both of them
were burnt in the hand; and I could name you several such as they are.'

We had frequent discourses of this kind, and abundance of instances she
gave me of the like.  After some time, as she was telling some stories
of one that was transported but a few weeks ago, I began in an intimate
kind of way to ask her to tell me something of her own story, which she
did with the utmost plainness and sincerity; how she had fallen into
very ill company in London in her young days, occasioned by her mother
sending her frequently to carry victuals and other relief to a
kinswoman of hers who was a prisoner in Newgate, and who lay in a
miserable starving condition, was afterwards condemned to be hanged,
but having got respite by pleading her belly, dies afterwards in the
prison.

Here my mother-in-law ran out in a long account of the wicked practices
in that dreadful place, and how it ruined more young people than all
the town besides.  'And child,' says my mother, 'perhaps you may know
little of it, or, it may be, have heard nothing about it; but depend
upon it,' says she, 'we all know here that there are more thieves and
rogues made by that one prison of Newgate than by all the clubs and
societies of villains in the nation; 'tis that cursed place,' says my
mother, 'that half peopled this colony.'

Here she went on with her own story so long, and in so particular a
manner, that I began to be very uneasy; but coming to one particular
that required telling her name, I thought I should have sunk down in
the place.  She perceived I was out of order, and asked me if I was not
well, and what ailed me.  I told her I was so affected with the
melancholy story she had told, and the terrible things she had gone
through, that it had overcome me, and I begged of her to talk no more
of it.  'Why, my dear,' says she very kindly, 'what need these things
trouble you?  These passages were long before your time, and they give
me no trouble at all now; nay, I look back on them with a particular
satisfaction, as they have been a means to bring me to this place.'
Then she went on to tell me how she very luckily fell into a good
family, where, behaving herself well, and her mistress dying, her
master married her, by whom she had my husband and his sister, and that
by her diligence and good management after her husband's death, she had
improved the plantations to such a degree as they then were, so that
most of the estate was of her getting, not her husband's, for she had
been a widow upwards of sixteen years.

I heard this part of the story with very little attention, because I
wanted much to retire and give vent to my passions, which I did soon
after; and let any one judge what must be the anguish of my mind, when
I came to reflect that this was certainly no more or less than my own
mother, and I had now had two children, and was big with another by my
own brother, and lay with him still every night.

I was now the most unhappy of all women in the world.  Oh!  had the
story never been told me, all had been well; it had been no crime to
have lain with my husband, since as to his being my relation I had
known nothing of it.

I had now such a load on my mind that it kept me perpetually waking; to
reveal it, which would have been some ease to me, I could not find
would be to any purpose, and yet to conceal it would be next to
impossible; nay, I did not doubt but I should talk of it in my sleep,
and tell my husband of it whether I would or no.  If I discovered it,
the least thing I could expect was to lose my husband, for he was too
nice and too honest a man to have continued my husband after he had
known I had been his sister; so that I was perplexed to the last degree.

I leave it to any man to judge what difficulties presented to my view.
I was away from my native country, at a distance prodigious, and the
return to me unpassable.  I lived very well, but in a circumstance
insufferable in itself.  If I had discovered myself to my mother, it
might be difficult to convince her of the particulars, and I had no way
to prove them.  On the other hand, if she had questioned or doubted me,
I had been undone, for the bare suggestion would have immediately
separated me from my husband, without gaining my mother or him, who
would have been neither a husband nor a brother; so that between the
surprise on one hand, and the uncertainty on the other, I had been sure
to be undone.

In the meantime, as I was but too sure of the fact, I lived therefore
in open avowed incest and whoredom, and all under the appearance of an
honest wife; and though I was not much touched with the crime of it,
yet the action had something in it shocking to nature, and made my
husband, as he thought himself, even nauseous to me.

However, upon the most sedate consideration, I resolved that it was
absolutely necessary to conceal it all and not make the least discovery
of it either to mother or husband; and thus I lived with the greatest
pressure imaginable for three years more, but had no more children.

During this time my mother used to be frequently telling me old stories
of her former adventures, which, however, were no ways pleasant to me;
for by it, though she did not tell it me in plain terms, yet I could
easily understand, joined with what I had heard myself, of my first
tutors, that in her younger days she had been both whore and thief; but
I verily believed she had lived to repent sincerely of both, and that
she was then a very pious, sober, and religious woman.

Well, let her life have been what it would then, it was certain that my
life was very uneasy to me; for I lived, as I have said, but in the
worst sort of whoredom, and as I could expect no good of it, so really
no good issue came of it, and all my seeming prosperity wore off, and
ended in misery and destruction.  It was some time, indeed, before it
came to this, for, but I know not by what ill fate guided, everything
went wrong with us afterwards, and that which was worse, my husband
grew strangely altered, forward, jealous, and unkind, and I was as
impatient of bearing his carriage, as the carriage was unreasonable and
unjust.  These things proceeded so far, that we came at last to be in
such ill terms with one another, that I claimed a promise of him, which
he entered willingly into with me when I consented to come from England
with him, viz. that if I found the country not to agree with me, or
that I did not like to live there, I should come away to England again
when I pleased, giving him a year's warning to settle his affairs.

I say, I now claimed this promise of him, and I must confess I did it
not in the most obliging terms that could be in the world neither; but
I insisted that he treated me ill, that I was remote from my friends,
and could do myself no justice, and that he was jealous without cause,
my conversation having been unblamable, and he having no pretense for
it, and that to remove to England would take away all occasion from him.

I insisted so peremptorily upon it, that he could not avoid coming to a
point, either to keep his word with me or to break it; and this,
notwithstanding he used all the skill he was master of, and employed
his mother and other agents to prevail with me to alter my resolutions;
indeed, the bottom of the thing lay at my heart, and that made all his
endeavours fruitless, for my heart was alienated from him as a husband.
I loathed the thoughts of bedding with him, and used a thousand
pretenses of illness and humour to prevent his touching me, fearing
nothing more than to be with child by him, which to be sure would have
prevented, or at least delayed, my going over to England.

However, at last I put him so out of humour, that he took up a rash and
fatal resolution; in short, I should not go to England; and though he
had promised me, yet it was an unreasonable thing for me to desire it;
that it would be ruinous to his affairs, would unhinge his whole
family, and be next to an undoing him in the world; that therefore I
ought not to desire it of him, and that no wife in the world that
valued her family and her husband's prosperity would insist upon such a
thing.

This plunged me again, for when I considered the thing calmly, and took
my husband as he really was, a diligent, careful man in the main work
of laying up an estate for his children, and that he knew nothing of
the dreadful circumstances that he was in, I could not but confess to
myself that my proposal was very unreasonable, and what no wife that
had the good of her family at heart would have desired.

But my discontents were of another nature; I looked upon him no longer
as a husband, but as a near relation, the son of my own mother, and I
resolved somehow or other to be clear of him, but which way I did not
know, nor did it seem possible.

It is said by the ill-natured world, of our sex, that if we are set on
a thing, it is impossible to turn us from our resolutions; in short, I
never ceased poring upon the means to bring to pass my voyage, and came
that length with my husband at last, as to propose going without him.
This provoked him to the last degree, and he called me not only an
unkind wife, but an unnatural mother, and asked me how I could
entertain such a thought without horror, as that of leaving my two
children (for one was dead) without a mother, and to be brought up by
strangers, and never to see them more.  It was true, had things been
right, I should not have done it, but now it was my real desire never
to see them, or him either, any more; and as to the charge of
unnatural, I could easily answer it to myself, while I knew that the
whole relation was unnatural in the highest degree in the world.

However, it was plain there was no bringing my husband to anything; he
would neither go with me nor let me go without him, and it was quite
out of my power to stir without his consent, as any one that knows the
constitution of the country I was in, knows very well.

We had many family quarrels about it, and they began in time to grow up
to a dangerous height; for as I was quite estranged from my husband (as
he was called) in affection, so I took no heed to my words, but
sometimes gave him language that was provoking; and, in short, strove
all I could to bring him to a parting with me, which was what above all
things in the world I desired most.

He took my carriage very ill, and indeed he might well do so, for at
last I refused to bed with him, and carrying on the breach upon all
occasions to extremity, he told me once he thought I was mad, and if I
did not alter my conduct, he would put me under cure; that is to say,
into a madhouse.  I told him he should find I was far enough from mad,
and that it was not in his power, or any other villain's, to murder me.
I confess at the same time I was heartily frighted at his thoughts of
putting me into a madhouse, which would at once have destroyed all the
possibility of breaking the truth out, whatever the occasion might be;
for that then no one would have given credit to a word of it.

This therefore brought me to a resolution, whatever came of it, to lay
open my whole case; but which way to do it, or to whom, was an
inextricable difficulty, and took me many months to resolve.  In the
meantime, another quarrel with my husband happened, which came up to
such a mad extreme as almost pushed me on to tell it him all to his
face; but though I kept it in so as not to come to the particulars, I
spoke so much as put him into the utmost confusion, and in the end
brought out the whole story.

He began with a calm expostulation upon my being so resolute to go to
England; I defended it, and one hard word bringing on another, as is
usual in all family strife, he told me I did not treat him as if he was
my husband, or talk of my children as if I was a mother; and, in short,
that I did not deserve to be used as a wife; that he had used all the
fair means possible with me; that he had argued with all the kindness
and calmness that a husband or a Christian ought to do, and that I made
him such a vile return, that I treated him rather like a dog than a
man, and rather like the most contemptible stranger than a husband;
that he was very loth to use violence with me, but that, in short, he
saw a necessity of it now, and that for the future he should be obliged
to take such measures as should reduce me to my duty.

My blood was now fired to the utmost, though I knew what he had said
was very true, and nothing could appear more provoked.  I told him, for
his fair means and his foul, they were equally contemned by me; that
for my going to England, I was resolved on it, come what would; and
that as to treating him not like a husband, and not showing myself a
mother to my children, there might be something more in it than he
understood at present; but, for his further consideration, I thought
fit to tell him thus much, that he neither was my lawful husband, nor
they lawful children, and that I had reason to regard neither of them
more than I did.

I confess I was moved to pity him when I spoke it, for he turned pale
as death, and stood mute as one thunderstruck, and once or twice I
thought he would have fainted; in short, it put him in a fit something
like an apoplex; he trembled, a sweat or dew ran off his face, and yet
he was cold as a clod, so that I was forced to run and fetch something
for him to keep life in him.  When he recovered of that, he grew sick
and vomited, and in a little after was put to bed, and the next morning
was, as he had been indeed all night, in a violent fever.

However, it went off again, and he recovered, though but slowly, and
when he came to be a little better, he told me I had given him a mortal
wound with my tongue, and he had only one thing to ask before he
desired an explanation.  I interrupted him, and told him I was sorry I
had gone so far, since I saw what disorder it put him into, but I
desired him not to talk to me of explanations, for that would but make
things worse.

This heightened his impatience, and, indeed, perplexed him beyond all
bearing; for now he began to suspect that there was some mystery yet
unfolded, but could not make the least guess at the real particulars of
it; all that ran in his brain was, that I had another husband alive,
which I could not say in fact might not be true, but I assured him,
however, there was not the least of that in it; and indeed, as to my
other husband, he was effectually dead in law to me, and had told me I
should look on him as such, so I had not the least uneasiness on that
score.

But now I found the thing too far gone to conceal it much longer, and
my husband himself gave me an opportunity to ease myself of the secret,
much to my satisfaction.  He had laboured with me three or four weeks,
but to no purpose, only to tell him whether I had spoken these words
only as the effect of my passion, to put him in a passion, or whether
there was anything of  truth in the bottom of them.  But I continued
inflexible, and would explain nothing, unless he would first consent to
my going to England, which he would never do, he said, while he lived;
on the other hand, I said it was in my power to make him willing when I
pleased--nay, to make him entreat me to go; and this increased his
curiosity, and made him importunate to the highest degree, but it was
all to no purpose.

At length he tells all this story to his mother, and sets her upon me
to get the main secret out of me, and she used her utmost skill with me
indeed; but I put her to a full stop at once by telling her that the
reason and mystery of the whole matter lay in herself, and that it was
my respect to her that had made me conceal it; and that, in short, I
could go no farther, and therefore conjured her not to insist upon it.

She was struck dumb at this suggestion, and could not tell what to say
or to think; but, laying aside the supposition as a policy of mine,
continued her importunity on account of her son, and, if possible, to
make up the breach between us two.  As to that, I told her that it was
indeed a good design in her, but that it was impossible to be done; and
that if I should reveal to her the truth of what she desired, she would
grant it to be impossible, and cease to desire it.  At last I seemed to
be prevailed on by her importunity, and told her I dared trust her with
a secret of the greatest importance, and she would soon see that this
was so, and that I would consent to lodge it in her breast, if she
would engage solemnly not to acquaint her son with it without my
consent.

She was long in promising this part, but rather than not come at the
main secret, she agreed to that too, and after a great many other
preliminaries, I began, and told her the whole story.  First I told her
how much she was concerned in all the unhappy breach which had happened
between her son and me, by telling me her own story and her London
name; and that the surprise she saw I was in was upon that occasion.
Then I told her my own story, and my name, and assured her, by such
other tokens as she could not deny, that I was no other, nor more or
less, than her own child, her daughter, born of her body in Newgate;
the same that had saved her from the gallows by being in her belly, and
the same that she left in such-and-such hands when she was transported.

It is impossible to express the astonishment she was in; she was not
inclined to believe the story, or to remember the particulars, for she
immediately foresaw the confusion that must follow in the family upon
it.  But everything concurred so exactly with the stories she had told
me of herself, and which, if she had not told me, she would perhaps
have been content to have denied, that she had stopped her own mouth,
and she had nothing to do but to take me about the neck and kiss me,
and cry most vehemently over me, without speaking one word for a long
time together.  At last she broke out:  'Unhappy child!' says she,
'what miserable chance could bring thee hither? and in the arms of my
own son, too!  Dreadful girl,' says she, 'why, we are all undone!
Married to thy own brother!  Three children, and two alive, all of the
same flesh and blood!  My son and my daughter lying together as husband
and wife!  All confusion and distraction for ever!  Miserable family!
what will become of us?  What is to be said?  What is to be done?'  And
thus she ran on for a great while; nor had I any power to speak, or if
I had, did I know what to say, for every word wounded me to the soul.
With this kind of amazement on our thoughts we parted for the first
time, though my mother was more surprised than I was, because it was
more news to her than to me.  However, she promised again to me at
parting, that she would say nothing of it to her son, till we had
talked of it again.

It was not long, you may be sure, before we had a second conference
upon the same subject; when, as if she had been willing to forget the
story she had told me of herself, or to suppose that I had forgot some
of the particulars, she began to tell them with alterations and
omissions; but I refreshed her memory and set her to rights in many
things which I supposed she had forgot, and then came in so opportunely
with the whole history, that it was impossible for her to go from it;
and then she fell into her rhapsodies again, and exclamations at the
severity of her misfortunes.  When these things were a little over with
her, we fell into a close debate about what should be first done before
we gave an account of the matter to my husband.  But to what purpose
could be all our consultations?  We could neither of us see our way
through it, nor see how it could be safe to open such a scene to him.
It was impossible to make any judgment, or give any guess at what
temper he would receive it in, or what measures he would take upon it;
and if he should have so little government of himself as to make it
public, we easily foresaw that it would be the ruin of the whole
family, and expose my mother and me to the last degree; and if at last
he should take the advantage the law would give him, he might put me
away with disdain and leave me to sue for the little portion that I
had, and perhaps waste it all in the suit, and then be a beggar; the
children would be ruined too, having no legal claim to any of his
effects; and thus I should see him, perhaps, in the arms of another
wife in a few months, and be myself the most miserable creature alive.

My mother was as sensible of this as I; and, upon the whole, we knew
not what to do.  After some time we came to more sober resolutions, but
then it was with this misfortune too, that my mother's opinion and mine
were quite different from one another, and indeed inconsistent with one
another; for my mother's opinion was, that I should bury the whole
thing entirely, and continue to live with him as my husband till some
other event should make the discovery of it more convenient; and that
in the meantime she would endeavour to reconcile us together again, and
restore our mutual comfort and family peace; that we might lie as we
used to do together, and so let the whole matter remain a secret as
close as death.  'For, child,' says she, 'we are both undone if it
comes out.'

To encourage me to this, she promised to make me easy in my
circumstances, as far as she was able, and to leave me what she could
at her death, secured for me separately from my husband; so that if it
should come out afterwards, I should not be left destitute, but be able
to stand on my own feet and procure justice from him.

This proposal did not agree at all with my judgment of the thing,
though it was very fair and kind in my mother; but my thoughts ran
quite another way.

As to keeping the thing in our own breasts, and letting it all remain
as it was, I told her it was impossible; and I asked her how she could
think I could bear the thoughts of lying with my own brother.  In the
next place, I told her that her being alive was the only support of the
discovery, and that while she owned me for her child, and saw reason to
be satisfied that I was so, nobody else would doubt it; but that if she
should die before the discovery, I should be taken for an impudent
creature that had forged such a thing to go away from my husband, or
should be counted crazed and distracted.  Then I told her how he had
threatened already to put me into a madhouse, and what concern I had
been in about it, and how that was the thing that drove me to the
necessity of discovering it to her as I had done.

From all which I told her, that I had, on the most serious reflections
I was able to make in the case, come to this resolution, which I hoped
she would like, as a medium between both, viz.  that she should use her
endeavours with her son to give me leave to go to England, as I had
desired, and to furnish me with a sufficient sum of money, either in
goods along with me, or in bills for my support there, all along
suggesting that he might one time or other think it proper to come over
to me.

That when I was gone, she should then, in cold blood, and after first
obliging him in the solemnest manner possible to secrecy, discover the
case to him, doing it gradually, and as her own discretion should guide
her, so that he might not be surprised with it, and fly out into any
passions and excesses on my account, or on hers; and that she should
concern herself to prevent his slighting the children, or marrying
again, unless he had a certain account of my being dead.

This was my scheme, and my reasons were good; I was really alienated
from him in the consequences of these things; indeed, I mortally hated
him as a husband, and it was impossible to remove that riveted aversion
I had to him.  At the same time, it being an unlawful, incestuous
living, added to that aversion, and though I had no great concern about
it in point of conscience, yet everything added to make cohabiting with
him the most nauseous thing to me in the world; and I think verily it
was come to such a height, that I could almost as willingly have
embraced a dog as have let him offer anything of that kind to me, for
which reason I could not bear the thoughts of coming between the sheets
with him.  I cannot say that I was right in point of policy in carrying
it such a length, while at the same time I did not resolve to discover
the thing to him; but I am giving an account of what was, not of what
ought or ought not to be.

In their directly opposite opinion to one another my mother and I
continued a long time, and it was impossible to reconcile our
judgments; many disputes we had about it, but we could never either of
us yield our own, or bring over the other.

I insisted on my aversion to lying with my own brother, and she
insisted upon its being impossible to bring him to consent to my going
from him to England; and in this uncertainty we continued, not
differing so as to quarrel, or anything like it, but so as not to be
able to resolve what we should do to make up that terrible breach that
was before us.

At last I resolved on a desperate course, and told my mother my
resolution, viz. that, in short, I would tell him of it myself.  My
mother was frighted to the last degree at the very thoughts of it; but
I bid her be easy, told her I would do it gradually and softly, and
with all the art and good-humour I was mistress of, and time it also as
well as I could, taking him in good-humour too.  I told her I did not
question but, if I could be hypocrite enough to feign more affection to
him than I really had, I should succeed in all my design, and we might
part by consent, and with a good agreement, for I might live him well
enough for a brother, though I could not for a husband.

All this while he lay at my mother to find out, if possible, what was
the meaning of that dreadful expression of mine, as he called it, which
I mentioned before:  namely, that I was not his lawful wife, nor my
children his legal children.  My mother put him off, told him she could
bring me to no explanations, but found there was something that
disturbed me very much, and she hoped she should get it out of me in
time, and in the meantime recommended to him earnestly to use me more
tenderly, and win me with his usual good carriage; told him of his
terrifying and affrighting me with his threats of sending me to a
madhouse, and the like, and advised him not to make a woman desperate
on any account whatever.

He promised her to soften his behaviour, and bid her assure me that he
loved me as well as ever, and that he had no such design as that of
sending me to a madhouse, whatever he might say in his passion; also he
desired my mother to use the same persuasions to me too, that our
affections might be renewed, and we might lie together in a good
understanding as we used to do.

I found the effects of this treaty presently.  My husband's conduct was
immediately altered, and he was quite another man to me; nothing could
be kinder and more obliging than he was to me upon all occasions; and I
could do no less than make some return to it, which I did as well as I
could, but it was but in an awkward manner at best, for nothing was
more frightful to me than his caresses, and the apprehensions of being
with child again by him was ready to throw me into fits; and this made
me see that there was an absolute necessity of breaking the case to him
without any more delay, which, however, I did with all the caution and
reserve imaginable.

He had continued his altered carriage to me near a month, and we began
to live a new kind of life with one another; and could I have satisfied
myself to have gone on with it, I believe it might have continued as
long as we had continued alive together.  One evening, as we were
sitting and talking very friendly together under a little awning, which
served as an arbour at the entrance from our house into the garden, he
was in a very pleasant, agreeable humour, and said abundance of kind
things to me relating to the pleasure of our present good agreement,
and the disorders of our past breach, and what a satisfaction it was to
him that we had room to hope we should never have any more of it.

I fetched a deep sigh, and told him there was nobody in the world could
be more delighted than I was in the good agreement we had always kept
up, or more afflicted with the breach of it, and should be so still;
but I was sorry to tell him that there was an unhappy circumstance in
our case, which lay too close to my heart, and which I knew not how to
break to him, that rendered my part of it very miserable, and took from
me all the comfort of the rest.

He importuned me to tell him what it was.  I told him I could not tell
how to do it; that while it was concealed from him I alone was unhappy,
but if he knew it also, we should be both so; and that, therefore, to
keep him in the dark about it was the kindest thing that I could do,
and it was on that account alone that I kept a secret from him, the
very keeping of which, I thought, would first or last be my destruction.

It is impossible to express his surprise at this relation, and the
double importunity which he used with me to discover it to him.  He
told me I could not be called kind to him, nay, I could not be faithful
to him if I concealed it from him.  I told him I thought so too, and
yet I could not do it.  He went back to what I had said before to him,
and told me he hoped it did not relate to what I had said in my
passion, and that he had resolved to forget all that as the effect of a
rash, provoked spirit.  I told him I wished I could forget it all too,
but that it was not to be done, the impression was too deep, and I
could not do it:  it was impossible.

He then told me he was resolved not to differ with me in anything, and
that therefore he would importune me no more about it, resolving to
acquiesce in whatever I did or said; only begged I should then agree,
that whatever it was, it should no more interrupt our quiet and our
mutual kindness.

This was the most provoking thing he could have said to me, for I
really wanted his further importunities, that I might be prevailed with
to bring out that which indeed it was like death to me to conceal; so I
answered him plainly that I could not say I was glad not to be
importuned, thought I could not tell how to comply.  'But come, my
dear,' said I, 'what conditions will you make with me upon the opening
this affair to you?'

'Any conditions in the world,' said he, 'that you can in reason desire
of me.'  'Well,' said I, 'come, give it me under your hand, that if you
do not find I am in any fault, or that I am willingly concerned in the
causes of the misfortune that is to follow, you will not blame me, use
me the worse, do me any injury, or make me be the sufferer for that
which is not my fault.'

'That,' says he, 'is the most reasonable demand in the world: not to
blame you for that which is not your fault.  Give me a pen and ink,'
says he; so I ran in and fetched a pen, ink, and paper, and he wrote
the condition down in the very words I had proposed it, and signed it
with his name.  'Well,' says  he, 'what is next, my dear?'

'Why,' says I, 'the next is, that you will not blame me for not
discovering the secret of it to you before I knew it.'

'Very just again,' says he; 'with all my heart'; so he wrote down that
also, and signed it.

'Well, my dear,' says I, 'then I have but one condition more to make
with you, and that is, that as there is nobody concerned in it but you
and I, you shall not discover it to any person in the world, except
your own mother; and that in all the measures you shall take upon the
discovery, as I am equally concerned in it with you, though as innocent
as yourself, you shall do nothing in a passion, nothing to my prejudice
or to your mother's prejudice, without my knowledge and consent.'

This a little amazed him, and he wrote down the words distinctly, but
read them over and over before he signed them, hesitating at them
several times, and repeating them:  'My mother's prejudice! and your
prejudice!  What mysterious thing can this be?'  However, at last he
signed it.

'Well, says I, 'my dear, I'll ask you no more under your hand; but as
you are to hear the most unexpected and surprising thing that perhaps
ever befell any family in the world, I beg you to promise me you will
receive it with composure and a presence of mind suitable to a man of
sense.'

'I'll do my utmost,' says he, 'upon condition you will keep me no
longer in suspense, for you terrify me with all these preliminaries.'

'Well, then,' says I, 'it is this: as I told you before in a heat, that
I was not your lawful wife, and that our children were not legal
children, so I must let you know now in calmness and in kindness, but
with affliction enough, that I am your own sister, and you my own
brother, and that we are both the children of our mother now alive, and
in the house, who is convinced of the truth of it, in a manner not to
be denied or contradicted.'

I saw him turn pale and look wild; and I said, 'Now remember your
promise, and receive it with presence of mind; for who could have said
more to prepare you for it than I have done?' However, I called a
servant, and got him a little glass of rum (which is the usual dram of
that country), for he was just fainting away.  When he was a little
recovered, I said to him, 'This story, you may be sure, requires a long
explanation, and therefore, have patience and compose your mind to hear
it out, and I'll make it as short as I can'; and with this, I told him
what I thought was needful of the fact, and particularly how my mother
came to discover it to me, as above.  'And now, my dear,' says I, 'you
will see reason for my capitulations, and that I neither have been the
cause of this matter, nor could be so, and that I could know nothing of
it before now.'

'I am fully satisfied of that,' says he, 'but 'tis a dreadful surprise
to me; however, I know a remedy for it all, and a remedy that shall put
an end to your difficulties, without your going to England.'  'That
would be strange,' said I, 'as all the rest.' 'No, no,' says he, 'I'll
make it easy; there's nobody in the way of it but myself.'  He looked a
little disordered when he said this, but I did not apprehend anything
from it at that time, believing, as it used to be said, that they who
do those things never talk of them, or that they who talk of such
things never do them.

But things were not come to their height with him, and I observed he
became pensive and melancholy; and in a word, as I thought, a little
distempered in his head.  I endeavoured to talk him into temper, and to
reason him into a kind of scheme for our government in the affair, and
sometimes he would be well, and talk with some courage about it; but
the weight of it lay too heavy upon his thoughts, and, in short, it
went so far that he made attempts upon himself, and in one of them had
actually strangled himself and had not his mother come into the room in
the very moment, he had died; but with the help of a Negro servant she
cut him down and recovered him.

Things were now come to a lamentable height in the family.  My pity for
him now began to revive that affection which at first I really had for
him, and I endeavoured sincerely, by all the kind carriage I could, to
make up the breach; but, in short, it had gotten too great a head, it
preyed upon his spirits, and it threw him into a long, lingering
consumption, though it happened not to be mortal.  In this distress I
did not know what to do, as his life was apparently declining, and I
might perhaps have married again there, very much to my advantage; it
had been certainly my business to have stayed in the country, but my
mind was restless too, and uneasy; I hankered after coming to England,
and nothing would satisfy me without it.

In short, by an unwearied importunity, my husband, who was apparently
decaying, as I observed, was at last prevailed with; and so my own fate
pushing me on, the way was made clear for me, and my mother concurring,
I obtained a very good cargo for my coming to England.

When I parted with my brother (for such I am now to call him), we
agreed that after I arrived he should pretend to have an account that I
was dead in England, and so might marry again when he would.  He
promised, and engaged to me to correspond with me as a sister, and to
assist and support me as long as I lived; and that if he died before
me, he would leave sufficient to his mother to take care of me still,
in the name of a sister, and he was in some respects careful of me,
when he heard of me; but it was so oddly managed that I felt the
disappointments very sensibly afterwards, as you shall hear in its time.

I came away for England in the month of August, after I had been eight
years in that country; and now a new scene of misfortunes attended me,
which perhaps few women have gone through the life of.

We had an indifferent good voyage till we came just upon the coast of
England, and where we arrived in two-and-thirty days, but were then
ruffled with two or three storms, one of which drove us away to the
coast of Ireland, and we put in at Kinsdale.  We remained there about
thirteen days, got some refreshment on shore, and put to sea again,
though we met with very bad weather again, in which the ship sprung her
mainmast, as they called it, for I knew not what they meant.  But we
got at last into Milford Haven, in Wales, where, though it was remote
from our port, yet having my foot safe upon the firm ground of my
native country, the isle of Britain, I resolved to venture it no more
upon the waters, which had been so terrible to me; so getting my
clothes and money on shore, with my bills of loading and other papers,
I resolved to come for London, and leave the ship to get to her port as
she could; the port whither she was bound was to Bristol, where my
brother's chief correspondent lived.

I got to London in about three weeks, where I heard a little while
after that the ship was arrived in Bristol, but at the same time had
the misfortune to know that by the violent weather she had been in, and
the breaking of her mainmast, she had great damage on board, and that a
great part of her cargo was spoiled.

I had now a new scene of life upon my hands, and a dreadful appearance
it had.  I was come away with a kind of final farewell.  What I brought
with me was indeed considerable, had it come safe, and by the help of
it, I might have married again tolerably well; but as it was, I was
reduced to between two or three hundred pounds in the whole, and this
without any hope of recruit.  I was entirely without friends, nay, even
so much as without acquaintance, for I found it was absolutely
necessary not to revive former acquaintances; and as for my subtle
friend that set me up formerly for a fortune, she was dead, and her
husband also; as I was informed, upon sending a person unknown to
inquire.

The looking after my cargo of goods soon after obliged me to take a
journey to Bristol, and during my attendance upon that affair I took
the diversion of going to the Bath, for as I was still far from being
old, so my humour, which was always gay, continued so to an extreme;
and being now, as it were, a woman of fortune though I was a woman
without a fortune, I expected something or other might happen in my way
that might mend my circumstances, as had been my case before.

The Bath is a place of gallantry enough; expensive, and full of snares.
I went thither, indeed, in the view of taking anything that might
offer, but I must do myself justice, as to protest I knew nothing
amiss; I meant nothing but in an honest way, nor had I any thoughts
about me at first that looked the way which afterwards I suffered them
to be guided.

Here I stayed the whole latter season, as it is called there, and
contracted some unhappy acquaintances, which rather prompted the
follies I fell afterwards into than fortified me against them.  I lived
pleasantly enough, kept good company, that is to say, gay, fine
company; but had the discouragement to find this way of living sunk me
exceedingly, and that as I had no settled income, so spending upon the
main stock was but a certain kind of bleeding to death; and this gave
me many sad reflections in the interval of my other thoughts.  However,
I shook them off, and still flattered myself that something or other
might offer for my advantage.

But I was in the wrong place for it.  I was not now at Redriff, where,
if I had set myself tolerably up, some honest sea captain or other
might have talked with me upon the honourable terms of matrimony; but I
was at the Bath, where men find a mistress sometimes, but very rarely
look for a wife; and consequently all the particular acquaintances a
woman can expect to make there must have some tendency that way.

I had spent the first season well enough; for though I had contracted
some acquaintance with a gentleman who came to the Bath for his
diversion, yet I had entered into no felonious treaty, as it might be
called.  I had resisted some casual offers of gallantry, and had
managed that way well enough.  I was not wicked enough to come into the
crime for the mere vice of it, and I had no extraordinary offers made
me that tempted me with the main thing which I wanted.

However, I went this length the first season, viz. I contracted an
acquaintance with a woman in whose house I lodged, who, though she did
not keep an ill house, as we call it, yet had none of the best
principles in herself.  I had on all occasions behaved myself so well
as not to get the least slur upon my reputation on any account
whatever, and all the men that I had conversed with were of so good
reputation that I had not given the least reflection by conversing with
them; nor did any of them seem to think there was room for a wicked
correspondence, if they had any of them offered it; yet there was one
gentleman, as above, who always singled me out for the diversion of my
company, as he called it, which, as he was pleased to say, was very
agreeable to him, but at that time there was no more in it.

I had many melancholy hours at the Bath after the company was gone; for
though I went to Bristol sometime for the disposing my effects, and for
recruits of money, yet I chose to come back to Bath for my residence,
because being on good terms with the woman in whose house I lodged in
the summer, I found that during the winter I lived rather cheaper there
than I could do anywhere else.  Here, I say, I passed the winter as
heavily as I had passed the autumn cheerfully; but having contracted a
nearer intimacy with the said woman in whose house I lodged, I could
not avoid communicating to her something of what lay hardest upon my
mind and particularly the narrowness of my circumstances, and the loss
of my fortune by the damage of my goods at sea.  I told her also, that
I had a mother and a brother in Virginia in good circumstances; and as
I had really written back to my mother in particular to represent my
condition, and the great loss I had received, which indeed came to
almost #500, so I did not fail to let my new friend know that I
expected a supply from thence, and so indeed I did; and as the ships
went from Bristol to York River, in Virginia, and back again generally
in less time from London, and that my brother corresponded chiefly at
Bristol, I thought it was much better for me to wait here for my
returns than to go to London, where also I had not the least
acquaintance.

My new friend appeared sensibly affected with my condition, and indeed
was so very kind as to reduce the rate of my living with her to so low
a price during the winter, that she convinced me she got nothing by me;
and as for lodging, during the winter I paid nothing at all.

When the spring season came on, she continued to be as kind to me as
she could, and I lodged with her for a time, till it was found
necessary to do otherwise.  She had some persons of character that
frequently lodged in her house, and in particular the gentleman who, as
I said, singled me out for his companion the winter before; and he came
down again with another gentleman in his company and two servants, and
lodged in the same house.  I suspected that my landlady had invited him
thither, letting him know that I was still with her; but she denied it,
and protested to me that she did not, and he said the same.

In a word, this gentleman came down and continued to single me out for
his peculiar confidence as well as conversation.  He was a complete
gentleman, that must be confessed, and his company was very agreeable
to me, as mine, if I might believe him, was to him.  He made no
professions to me but of an extraordinary respect, and he had such an
opinion of my virtue, that, as he often professed, he believed if he
should offer anything else, I should reject him with contempt.  He soon
understood from me that I was a widow; that I had arrived at Bristol
from Virginia by the last ships; and that I waited at Bath till the
next Virginia fleet should arrive, by which I expected considerable
effects.  I understood by him, and by others of him, that he had a
wife, but that the lady was distempered in her head, and was under the
conduct of her own relations, which he consented to, to avoid any
reflections that might (as was not unusual in such cases) be cast on
him for mismanaging her cure; and in the meantime he came to the Bath
to divert his thoughts from the disturbance of such a melancholy
circumstance as that was.

My landlady, who of her own accord encouraged the correspondence on all
occasions, gave me an advantageous character of him, as a man of honour
and of virtue, as well as of great estate.  And indeed I had a great
deal of reason to say so of him too; for though we lodged both on a
floor, and he had frequently come into my chamber, even when I was in
bed, and I also into his when he was in bed, yet he never offered
anything to me further than a kiss, or so much as solicited me to
anything till long after, as you shall hear.

I frequently took notice to my landlady of his exceeding modesty, and
she again used to tell me, she believed it was so from the beginning;
however, she used to tell me that she thought I ought to expect some
gratification from him for my company, for indeed he did, as it were,
engross me, and I was seldom from him.  I told her I had not given him
the least occasion to think I wanted it, or that I would accept of it
from him.  She told me she would take that part upon her, and she did
so, and managed it so dexterously, that the first time we were together
alone, after she had talked with him, he began to inquire a little into
my circumstances, as how I had subsisted myself since I came on shore,
and whether I did not want money.  I stood off very boldly.  I told him
that though my cargo of tobacco was damaged, yet that it was not quite
lost; that the merchant I had been consigned to had so honestly managed
for me that I had not wanted, and that I hoped, with frugal management,
I should make it hold out till more would come, which I expected by the
next fleet; that in the meantime I had retrenched my expenses, and
whereas I kept a maid last season, now I lived without; and whereas I
had a chamber and a dining-room then on the first floor, as he knew, I
now had but one room, two pair of stairs, and the like.  'But I live,'
said I, 'as well satisfied now as I did then'; adding, that his company
had been a means to make me live much more cheerfully than otherwise I
should have done, for which I was much obliged to him; and so I put off
all room for any offer for the present.  However, it was not long
before he attacked me again, and told me he found that I was backward
to trust him with the secret of my circumstances, which he was sorry
for; assuring me that he inquired into it with no design to satisfy his
own curiosity, but merely to assist me, if there was any occasion; but
since I would not own myself to stand in need of any assistance, he had
but one thing more to desire of me, and that was, that I would promise
him that when I was any way straitened, or like to be so, I would
frankly tell him of it, and that I would make use of him with the same
freedom that he made the offer; adding, that I should always find I had
a true friend, though perhaps I was afraid to trust him.

I omitted nothing that was fit to be said by one infinitely obliged, to
let him know that I had a due sense of his kindness; and indeed from
that time I did not appear so much reserved to him as I had done
before, though still within the bounds of the strictest virtue on both
sides; but how free soever our conversation was, I could not arrive to
that sort of freedom which he desired, viz. to tell him I wanted money,
though I was secretly very glad of his offer.

Some weeks passed after this, and still I never asked him for money;
when my landlady, a cunning creature, who had often pressed me to it,
but found that I could not do it, makes a story of her own inventing,
and comes in bluntly to me when we were together.  'Oh, widow!' says
she, 'I have bad news to tell you this morning.'  'What is that?' said
I; 'are the Virginia ships taken by the French?'--for that was my fear.
'No, no,' says she, 'but the man you sent to Bristol yesterday for
money is come back, and says he has brought none.'

Now I could by no means like her project; I thought it looked too much
like prompting him, which indeed he did not want, and I clearly saw
that I should lose nothing by being backward to ask, so I took her up
short.  'I can't image why he should say so to you,' said I, 'for I
assure you he brought me all the money I sent him for, and here it is,'
said I (pulling out my purse with about twelve guineas in it); and
added, 'I intend you shall have most of it by and by.'

He seemed distasted a little at her talking as she did at first, as
well as I, taking it, as I fancied he would, as something forward of
her; but when he saw me give such an answer, he came immediately to
himself again.  The next morning we talked of it again, when I found he
was fully satisfied, and, smiling, said he hoped I would not want money
and not tell him of it, and that I had promised him otherwise.  I told
him I had been very much dissatisfied at my landlady's talking so
publicly the day before of  what she had nothing to do with; but I
supposed she wanted what I owed her, which was about eight guineas,
which I had resolved to give her, and had accordingly given it her the
same night she talked so foolishly.

He was in a might good humour when he heard me say I had paid her, and
it went off into some other discourse at that time.  But the next
morning, he having heard me up about my room before him, he called to
me, and I answering, he asked me to come into his chamber.  He was in
bed when I came in, and he made me come and sit down on his bedside,
for he said he had something to say to me which was of some moment.
After some very kind expressions, he asked me if I would be very honest
to him, and give a sincere answer to one thing he would desire of me.
After some little cavil at the word 'sincere,' and asking him if I had
ever given him any answers which were not sincere, I promised him I
would.  Why, then, his request was, he said, to let him see my purse.
I immediately put my hand into my pocket, and, laughing to him, pulled
it out, and there was in it three guineas and a half.  Then he asked me
if there was all the money I had.  I told him No, laughing again, not
by a great deal.

Well, then, he said, he would have me promise to go and fetch him all
the money I had, every farthing.  I told him I would, and I went into
my chamber and fetched him a little private drawer, where I had about
six guineas more, and some silver, and threw it all down upon the bed,
and told him there was all my wealth, honestly to a shilling.  He
looked a little at it, but did not tell it, and huddled it all into the
drawer again, and then reaching his pocket, pulled out a key, and bade
me open a little walnut-tree box he had upon the table, and bring him
such a drawer, which I did.  In which drawer there was a great deal of
money in gold, I believe near two hundred guineas, but I knew not how
much.  He took the drawer, and taking my hand, made me put it in and
take a whole handful.  I was backward at that, but he held my hand hard
in his hand, and put it into the drawer, and made me take out as many
guineas almost as I could well take up at once.

When I had done so, he made me put them into my lap, and took my little
drawer, and poured out all my money among his, and bade me get me gone,
and carry it all home into my own chamber.

I relate this story the more particularly because of the good-humour
there was in it, and to show the temper with which we conversed.  It
was not long after this but he began every day to find fault with my
clothes, with my laces and headdresses, and, in a word, pressed me to
buy better; which, by the way, I was willing enough to do, though I did
not seem to be so, for I loved nothing in the world better than fine
clothes.  I told him I must housewife the money he had lent me, or else
I should not be able to pay him again.  He then told me, in a few
words, that as he had a sincere respect for me, and knew my
circumstances, he had not lent me that money, but given it me, and that
he thought I had merited it from him by giving him my company so
entirely as I had done.  After this he made me take a maid, and keep
house, and his friend that come with him to Bath being gone, he obliged
me to diet him, which I did very willingly, believing, as it appeared,
that I should lose nothing by it, nor did the woman of the house fail
to find her account in it too.

We had lived thus near three months, when the company beginning to wear
away at the Bath, he talked of going away, and fain he would have me to
go to London with him.  I was not very easy in that proposal, not
knowing what posture I was to live in there, or how he might use me.
But while this was in debate he fell very sick; he had gone out to a
place in Somersetshire, called Shepton, where he had some business and
was there taken very ill, and so ill that he could not travel; so he
sent his man back to Bath, to beg me that I would hire a coach and come
over to him.  Before he went, he had left all his money and other
things of value with me, and what to do with them I did not know, but I
secured them as well as I could, and locked up the lodgings and went to
him, where I found him very ill indeed; however, I persuaded him to be
carried in a litter to the Bath, where there was more help and better
advice to be had.

He consented, and I brought him to the Bath, which was about fifteen
miles, as I remember.  Here he continued very ill of a fever, and kept
his bed five weeks, all which time I nursed him and tended him myself,
as much and as carefully as if I had been his wife; indeed, if I had
been his wife I could not have done more.  I sat up with him so much
and so often, that at last, indeed, he would not let me sit up any
longer, and then I got a pallet-bed into his room, and lay in it just
at his bed's feet.

I was indeed sensibly affected with his condition, and with the
apprehension of losing such a friend as he was, and was like to be to
me, and I used to sit and cry by him many hours together.  However, at
last he grew better, and gave hopes that he would recover, as indeed he
did, though very slowly.

Were it otherwise than what I am going to say, I should not be backward
to disclose it, as it is apparent I have done in other cases in this
account; but I affirm, that through all this conversation, abating the
freedom of coming into the chamber when I or he was in bed, and abating
the necessary offices of attending him night and day when he was sick,
there had not passed the least immodest word or action between us.  Oh
that it had been so to the last!

After some time he gathered strength and grew well apace, and I would
have removed my pallet-bed, but he would not let me, till he was able
to venture himself without anybody to sit up with him, and then I
removed to my own chamber.

He took many occasions to express his sense of my tenderness and
concern for him; and when he grew quite well, he made me a present of
fifty guineas for my care and, as he called it, for hazarding my life
to save his.

And now he made deep protestations of a sincere inviolable affection
for me, but all along attested it to be with the utmost reserve for my
virtue and his own.  I told him I was fully satisfied of it.  He
carried it that length that he protested to me, that if he was naked in
bed with me, he would as sacredly preserve my virtue as he would defend
it if I was assaulted by a ravisher.  I believed him, and told him I
did so; but this did not satisfy him, he would, he said, wait for some
opportunity to give me an undoubted testimony of it.

It was a great while after this that I had occasion, on my own
business, to go to Bristol, upon which he hired me a coach, and would
go with me, and did so; and now indeed our intimacy increased.  From
Bristol he carried me to Gloucester, which was merely a journey of
pleasure, to take the air; and here it was our hap to have no lodging
in the inn but in one large chamber with two beds in it.  The master of
the house going up with us to show his rooms, and coming into that
room, said very frankly to him, 'Sir, it is none of my business to
inquire whether the lady be your spouse or no, but if not, you may lie
as honestly in these two beds as if you were in two chambers,' and with
that he pulls a great curtain which drew quite across the room and
effectually divided the beds.  'Well,' says my friend, very readily,
'these beds will do, and as for the rest, we are too near akin to lie
together, though we may lodge near one another'; and this put an honest
face on the thing too.  When we came to go to bed, he decently went out
of the room till I was in bed, and then went to bed in the bed on his
own side of the room, but lay there talking to me a great while.

At last, repeating his usual saying, that he could lie naked in the bed
with me and not offer me the least injury, he starts out of his bed.
'And now, my dear,' says he, 'you shall see how just I will be to you,
and that I can keep my word,' and away he comes to my bed.

I resisted a little, but I must confess I should not have resisted him
much if he had not made those promises at all; so after a little
struggle, as I said, I lay still and let him come to bed.  When he was
there he took me in his arms, and so I lay all night with him, but he
had no more to do with me, or offered anything to me, other than
embracing me, as I say, in his arms, no, not the whole night, but rose
up and dressed him in the morning, and left me as innocent for him as I
was the day I was born.

This was a surprising thing to me, and perhaps may be so to others, who
know how the laws of nature work; for he was a strong, vigorous, brisk
person; nor did he act thus on a principle of religion at all, but of
mere affection; insisting on it, that though I was to him the most
agreeable woman in the world, yet, because he loved me, he could not
injure me.

I own it was a noble principle, but as it was what I never understood
before, so it was to me perfectly amazing.  We traveled the rest of the
journey as we did before, and came back to the Bath, where, as he had
opportunity to come to me when he would, he often repeated the
moderation, and I frequently lay with him, and he with me, and although
all the familiarities between man and wife were common to us, yet he
never once offered to go any farther, and he valued himself much upon
it.  I do not say that I was so wholly pleased with it as he thought I
was, for I own much wickeder than he, as you shall hear presently.

We lived thus near two years, only with this exception, that he went
three times to London in that time, and once he continued there four
months; but, to do him justice, he always supplied me with money to
subsist me very handsomely.

Had we continued thus, I confess we had had much to boast of; but as
wise men say, it is ill venturing too near the brink of a command, so
we found it; and here again I must do him the justice to own that the
first breach was not on his part.  It was one night that we were in bed
together warm and merry, and having drunk, I think, a little more wine
that night, both of us, than usual, although not in the least to
disorder either of us, when, after some other follies which I cannot
name, and being clasped close in his arms, I told him (I repeat it with
shame and horror of soul) that I could find in my heart to discharge
him of his engagement for one night and no more.

He took me at my word immediately, and after that there was no
resisting him; neither indeed had I any mind to resist him any more,
let what would come of it.

Thus the government of our virtue was broken, and I exchanged the place
of friend for that unmusical, harsh-sounding title of whore.  In the
morning we were both at our penitentials; I cried very heartily, he
expressed himself very sorry; but that was all either of us could do at
that time, and the way being thus cleared, and the bars of virtue and
conscience thus removed, we had the less difficult afterwards to
struggle with.

It was but a dull kind of conversation that we had together for all the
rest of that week; I looked on him with blushes, and every now and then
started that melancholy objection, 'What if I should be with child now?
What will become of me then?' He encouraged me by telling me, that as
long as I was true to him, he would be so to me; and since it was gone
such a length (which indeed he never intended), yet if I was with
child, he would take care of that, and of me too.  This hardened us
both.  I assured him if I was with child, I would die for want of a
midwife rather than name him as the father of it; and he assured me I
should never want if I should be with child.  These mutual assurances
hardened us in the thing, and after this we repeated the crime as often
as we pleased, till at length, as I had feared, so it came to pass, and
I was indeed with child.

After I was sure it was so, and I had satisfied him of it too, we began
to think of taking measures for the managing it, and I proposed
trusting the secret to my landlady, and asking her advice, which he
agreed to.  My landlady, a woman (as I found) used to such things, made
light of it; she said she knew it would come to that at last, and made
us very merry about it.  As I said above, we found her an experienced
old lady at such work; she undertook everything, engaged to procure a
midwife and a nurse, to satisfy all inquiries, and bring us off with
reputation, and she did so very dexterously indeed.

When I grew near my time she desired my gentleman to go away to London,
or make as if he did so.  When he was gone, she acquainted the parish
officers that there was a lady ready to lie in at her house, but that
she knew her husband very well, and gave them, as she pretended, an
account of his name, which she called Sir Walter Cleve; telling them he
was a very worthy gentleman, and that she would answer for all
inquiries, and the like.  This satisfied the parish officers presently,
and I lay in with as much credit as I could have done if I had really
been my Lady Cleve, and was assisted in my travail by three or four of
the best citizens' wives of Bath who lived in the neighbourhood, which,
however, made me a little the more expensive to him.  I often expressed
my concern to him about it, but he bid me not be concerned at it.

As he had furnished me very sufficiently with money for the
extraordinary expenses of my lying in, I had everything very handsome
about me, but did not affect to be gay or extravagant neither; besides,
knowing my own circumstances, and knowing the world as I had done, and
that such kind of things do not often last long, I took care to lay up
as much money as I could for a wet day, as I called it; making him
believe it was all spent upon the extraordinary appearance of things in
my lying in.

By this means, and including what he had given me as above, I had at
the end of my lying in about two hundred guineas by me, including also
what was left of my own.

I was brought to bed of a fine boy indeed, and a charming child it was;
and when he heard of it he wrote me a very kind, obliging letter about
it, and then told me, he thought it would look better for me to come
away for London as soon as I was up and well; that he had provided
apartments for me at Hammersmith, as if I came thither only from
London; and that after a little while I should go back to the Bath, and
he would go with me.

I liked this offer very well, and accordingly hired a coach on purpose,
and taking my child, and a wet-nurse to tend and suckle it, and a
maid-servant with me, away I went for London.

He met me at Reading in his own chariot, and taking me into that, left
the servant and the child in the hired coach, and so he brought me to
my new lodgings at Hammersmith; with which I had abundance of reason to
be very well pleased, for they were very handsome rooms, and I was very
well accommodated.

And now I was indeed in the height of what I might call my prosperity,
and I wanted nothing but to be a wife, which, however, could not be in
this case, there was no room for it; and therefore on all occasions I
studied to save what I could, as I have said above, against a time of
scarcity, knowing well enough that such things as these do not always
continue; that men that keep mistresses often change them, grow weary
of them, or jealous of them, or something or other happens to make them
withdraw their bounty; and sometimes the ladies that are thus well used
are not careful by a prudent conduct to preserve the esteem of their
persons, or the nice article of their fidelity, and then they are
justly cast off with contempt.

But I was secured in this point, for as I had no inclination to change,
so I had no manner of acquaintance in the whole house, and so no
temptation to look any farther.  I kept no company but in the family
when I lodged, and with the clergyman's lady at next door; so that when
he was absent I visited nobody, nor did he ever find me out of my
chamber or parlour whenever he came down; if I went anywhere to take
the air, it was always with him.

The living in this manner with him, and his with me, was certainly the
most undesigned thing in the world; he often protested to me, that when
he became first acquainted with me, and even to the very night when we
first broke in upon our rules, he never had the least design of lying
with me; that he always had a sincere affection for me, but not the
least real inclination to do what he had done.  I assured him I never
suspected him; that if I had I should not so easily have yielded to the
freedom which brought it on, but that it was all a surprise, and was
owing to the accident of our having yielded too far to our mutual
inclinations that night; and indeed I have often observed since, and
leave it as a caution to the readers of this story, that we ought to be
cautious of gratifying our inclinations in loose and lewd freedoms,
lest we find our resolutions of virtue fail us in the junction when
their assistance should be most necessary.

It is true, and I have confessed it before, that from the first hour I
began to converse with him, I resolved to let him lie with me, if he
offered it; but it was because I wanted his help and assistance, and I
knew no other way of securing him than that.  But when we were that night
together, and, as I have said, had gone such a length, I found my
weakness; the inclination was not to be resisted, but I was obliged to
yield up all even before he asked it.

However, he was so just to me that he never upbraided me with that; nor
did he ever express the least dislike of my conduct on any other
occasion, but always protested he was as much delighted with my company
as he was the first hour we came together:  I mean, came together as
bedfellows.

It is true that he had no wife, that is to say, she was as no wife to
him, and so I was in no danger that way, but the just reflections of
conscience oftentimes snatch a man, especially a man of sense, from the
arms of a mistress, as it did him at last, though on another occasion.

On the other hand, though I was not without secret reproaches of my own
conscience for the life I led, and that even in the greatest height of
the satisfaction I ever took, yet I  had the terrible prospect of
poverty and starving, which lay on me as a frightful spectre, so that
there was no looking behind me.  But as poverty brought me into it, so
fear of poverty kept me in it, and I frequently resolved to leave it
quite off, if I could but come to lay up money enough to maintain me.
But these were thoughts of no weight, and whenever he came to me they
vanished; for his company was so delightful, that there was no being
melancholy when he was there; the reflections were all the subject of
those hours when I was alone.

I lived six years in this happy but unhappy condition, in which time I
brought him three children, but only the first of them lived; and
though I removed twice in those six years, yet I came back the sixth
year to my first lodgings at Hammersmith.  Here it was that I was one
morning surprised with a kind but melancholy letter from my gentleman,
intimating that he was very ill, and was afraid he should have another
fit of sickness, but that his wife's relations being in the house with
him, it would not be practicable to have me with him, which, however,
he expressed his great dissatisfaction in, and that he wished I could
be allowed to tend and nurse him as I did before.

I was very much concerned at this account, and was very impatient to
know how it was with him.  I waited a fortnight or thereabouts, and
heard nothing, which surprised me, and I began to be very uneasy
indeed.  I think, I may say, that for the next fortnight I was near to
distracted.  It was my particular difficulty that I did not know
directly where he was; for I understood at first he was in the lodgings
of his wife's mother; but having removed myself to London, I soon
found, by the help of the direction I had for writing my letters to
him, how to inquire after him, and there I found that he was at a house
in Bloomsbury, whither he had, a little before he fell sick, removed
his whole family; and that his wife and wife's mother were in the same
house, though the wife was not suffered to know that she was in the
same house with her husband.

Here I also soon understood that he was at the last extremity, which
made me almost at the last extremity too, to have a true account.  One
night I had the curiosity to disguise myself like a servant-maid, in a
round cap and straw hat, and went to the door, as sent by a lady of his
neighbourhood, where he lived before, and giving master and mistress's
service, I said I was sent to know how Mr. ---- did, and how he had
rested that night.  In delivering this message I got the opportunity I
desired; for, speaking with one of the maids, I held a long gossip's
tale with her, and had all the particulars of his illness, which I
found was a pleurisy, attended with a cough and a fever.  She told me
also who was in the house, and how his wife was, who, by her relation,
they were in some hopes might recover her understanding; but as to the
gentleman himself, in short she told me the doctors said there was very
little hopes of him, that in the morning they thought he had been
dying, and that he was but little better then, for they did not expect
that he could live over the next night.

This was heavy news for me, and I began now to see an end of my
prosperity, and to see also that it was very well I had played to good
housewife, and secured or saved something while he was alive, for that
now I had no view of my own living before me.

It lay very heavy upon my mind, too, that I had a son, a fine lovely
boy, about five years old, and no provision made for it, at least that
I knew of.  With these considerations, and a sad heart, I went home
that evening, and began to cast with myself how I should live, and in
what manner to bestow myself, for the residue of my life.

You may be sure I could not rest without inquiring again very quickly
what was become of him; and not venturing to go myself, I sent several
sham messengers, till after a fortnight's waiting longer, I found that
there was hopes of his life, though he was still very ill; then I
abated my sending any more to the house, and in some time after I
learned in the neighbourhood that he was about house, and then that he
was abroad again.

I made no doubt then but that I should soon hear of him, and began to
comfort myself with my circumstances being, as I thought, recovered. I
waited a week, and two weeks, and with much surprise and amazement I
waited near two months and heard nothing, but that, being recovered, he
was gone into the country for the air, and for the better recovery
after his distemper.  After this it was yet two months more, and then I
understood he was come to his city house again, but still I heard
nothing from him.

I had written several letters for him, and directed them as usual, and
found two or three of them had been called for, but not the rest.  I
wrote again in a more pressing manner than ever, and in one of them let
him know, that I must be forced to wait on him myself, representing my
circumstances, the rent of lodgings to pay, and the provision for the
child wanting, and my own deplorable condition, destitute of
subsistence for his most solemn engagement to take care of and provide
for me.  I took a copy of this letter, and finding it lay at the house
near a month and was not called for, I found means to have the copy of
it put into his own hands at a coffee-house, where I had by inquiry
found he used to go.

This letter forced an answer from him, by which, though I found I was
to be abandoned, yet I found he had sent a letter to me some time
before, desiring me to go down to the Bath again.  Its contents I shall
come to presently.

It is true that sick-beds are the time when such correspondences as
this are looked on with different countenances, and seen with other
eyes than we saw them with, or than they appeared with before.  My
lover had been at the gates of death, and at the very brink of
eternity; and, it seems, had been struck with a due remorse, and with
sad reflections upon his past life of gallantry and levity; and among
the rest, criminal correspondence with me, which was neither more nor
less than a long-continued life of adultery, and represented itself as
it really was, not as it had been formerly thought by him to be, and he
looked upon it now with a just and religious abhorrence.

I cannot but observe also, and leave it for the direction of my sex in
such cases of pleasure, that whenever sincere repentance succeeds such
a crime as this, there never fails to attend a hatred of the object;
and the more the affection might seem to be before, the hatred will be
the more in proportion.  It will always be so, indeed it can be no
otherwise; for there cannot be a true and sincere abhorrence of the
offence, and the love to the cause of it remain; there will, with an
abhorrence of the sin, be found a detestation of the fellow-sinner; you
can expect no other.

I found it so here, though good manners and justice in this gentleman
kept him from carrying it on to any extreme but the short history of
his part in this affair was thus:  he perceived by my last letter, and
by all the rest, which he went for after, that I was not gone to Bath,
that his first letter had not come to my hand; upon which he write me
this following:--


'MADAM,--I am surprised that my letter, dated the 8th of last month,
did not come to your hand; I give you my word it was delivered at your
lodgings, and to the hands of your maid.

'I need not acquaint you with what has been my condition for some time
past; and how, having been at the edge of the grave, I am, by the
unexpected and undeserved mercy of Heaven, restored again.  In the
condition I have been in, it cannot be strange to you that our unhappy
correspondence had not been the least of the burthens which lay upon my
conscience.  I need say no more; those things that must be repented of,
must be also reformed.

I wish you would think of going back to the Bath.  I enclose you here a
bill for #50 for clearing yourself at your lodgings, and carrying you
down, and hope it will be no surprise to you to add, that on this
account only, and not for any offence given me on your side, I can see
you no more.  I will take due care of the child; leave him where he is,
or take him with you, as you please.  I wish you the like reflections,
and that they may be to your advantage.--I am,' etc.


I was struck with this letter as with a thousand wounds, such as I
cannot describe; the reproaches of my own conscience were such as I
cannot express, for I was not blind to my own crime; and I reflected
that I might with less offence have continued with my brother, and
lived with him as a wife, since there was no crime in our marriage on
that score, neither of us knowing it.

But I never once reflected that I was all this while a married woman, a
wife to Mr. ---- the linen-draper, who, though he had left me by the
necessity of his circumstances, had no power to discharge me from the
marriage contract which was between us, or to give me a legal liberty
to marry again; so that I had been no less than a whore and an
adulteress all this while.  I then reproached myself with the liberties
I had taken, and how I had been a snare to this gentleman, and that
indeed I was principal in the crime; that now he was mercifully
snatched out of the gulf by a convincing work upon his mind, but that I
was left as if I was forsaken of God's grace, and abandoned by Heaven
to a continuing in my wickedness.

Under these reflections I continued very pensive and sad for near
month, and did not go down to the Bath, having no inclination to be
with the woman whom I was with before; lest, as I thought, she should
prompt me to some wicked course of life again, as she had done; and
besides, I was very loth she should know I was cast off as above.

And now I was greatly perplexed about my little boy.  It was death to
me to part with the child, and yet when I considered the danger of
being one time or other left with him to keep without a maintenance to
support him, I then resolved to leave him where he was; but then I
concluded also to be near him myself too, that I then might have the
satisfaction of seeing him, without the care of providing for him.

I sent my gentleman a short letter, therefore, that I had obeyed his
orders in all things but that of going back to the Bath, which I could
not think of for many reasons; that however parting from him was a
wound to me that I could never recover, yet that I was fully satisfied
his reflections were just, and would be very far from desiring to
obstruct his reformation or repentance.

Then I represented my own circumstances to him in the most moving terms
that I was able.  I told him that those unhappy distresses which first
moved him to a generous and an honest friendship for me, would, I hope,
move him to a little concern for me now, though the criminal part of
our correspondence, which I believed neither of us intended to fall
into at the time, was broken off; that I desired to repent as sincerely
as he had done, but entreated him to put me in some condition that I
might not be exposed to the temptations which the devil never fails to
excite us to from the frightful prospect of poverty and distress; and
if he had the least apprehensions of my being troublesome to him, I
begged he would put me in a posture to go back to my mother in
Virginia, from when he knew I came, and that would put an end to all
his fears on that account.  I concluded, that if he would send me #50
more to facilitate my going away, I would send him back a general
release, and would promise never to disturb him more with any
importunities; unless it was to hear of the well-doing of the child,
whom, if I found my mother living and my circumstances able, I would
send for to come over to me, and take him also effectually off his
hands.

This was indeed all a cheat thus far, viz. that I had no intention to
go to Virginia, as the account of my former affairs there may convince
anybody of; but the business was to get this last #50 of him, if
possible, knowing well enough it would be the last penny I was ever to
expect.

However, the argument I used, namely, of giving him a general release,
and never troubling him any more, prevailed effectually with him, and
he sent me a bill for the money by a person who brought with him a
general release for me to sign, and which I frankly signed, and
received the money; and thus, though full sore against my will, a final
end was put to this affair.

And here I cannot but reflect upon the unhappy consequence of too great
freedoms between persons stated as we were, upon the pretence of
innocent intentions, love of friendship, and the like; for the flesh
has generally so great a share in those friendships, that is great odds
but inclination prevails at last over the most solemn resolutions; and
that vice breaks in at the breaches of decency, which really innocent
friendship ought to preserve with the greatest strictness.  But I leave
the readers of these things to their own just reflections, which they
will be more able to make effectual than I, who so soon forgot myself,
and am therefore but a very indifferent monitor.

I was now a single person again, as I may call myself; I was loosed
from all the obligations either of wedlock or mistress-ship in the
world, except my husband the linen-draper, whom, I having not now heard
from in almost fifteen years, nobody could blame me for thinking myself
entirely freed from; seeing also he had at his going away told me, that
if I did not hear frequently from him, I should conclude he was dead,
and I might freely marry again to whom I pleased.

I now began to cast up my accounts.  I had by many letters and much
importunity, and with the intercession of my mother too, had a second
return of some goods from my brother (as I now call him) in Virginia,
to make up the damage of the cargo I brought away with me, and this too
was upon the condition of my sealing a general release to him, and to
send it him by his correspondent at Bristol, which, though I thought
hard of, yet I was obliged to promise to do.  However, I managed so
well in this case, that I got my goods away before the release was
signed, and then I always found something or other to say to evade the
thing, and to put off the signing it at all; till at length I pretended
I must write to my brother, and have his answer, before I could do it.

Including this recruit, and before I got the last #50, I found my
strength to amount, put all together, to about #400, so that with that
I had about #450.  I had saved above #100 more, but I met with a
disaster with that, which was this--that a goldsmith in whose hands I
had trusted it, broke, so I lost #70 of my money, the man's composition
not making above #30 out of his #100.  I had a little plate, but not
much, and was well enough stocked with clothes and linen.

With this stock I had the world to begin again; but you are to consider
that I was not now the same woman as when I lived at Redriff; for,
first of all, I was near twenty years older, and did not look the
better for my age, nor for my rambles to Virginia and back again; and
though I omitted nothing that might set me out to advantage, except
painting, for that I never stooped to, and had pride enough to think I
did not want it, yet there would always be some difference seen between
five-and-twenty and two-and-forty.

I cast about innumerable ways for my future state of life, and began to
consider very seriously what I should do, but nothing offered.  I took
care to make the world take me for something more than I was, and had
it given out that I was a fortune, and that my estate was in my own
hands; the last of which was very true, the first of it was as above.
I had no acquaintance, which was one of my worst misfortunes, and the
consequence of that was, I had no adviser, at least who could assist
and advise together; and above all, I had nobody to whom I could in
confidence commit the secret of my circumstances to, and could depend
upon for their secrecy and fidelity; and I found by experience, that to
be friendless is the worst condition, next to being in want that a
woman can be reduced to:  I say a woman, because 'tis evident men can
be their own advisers, and their own directors, and know how to work
themselves out of difficulties and into business better than women; but
if a woman has no friend to communicate her affairs to, and to advise
and assist her, 'tis ten to one but she is undone; nay, and the more
money she has, the more danger she is in of being wronged and deceived;
and this was my case in the affair of the #100 which I left in the
hands of the goldsmith, as above, whose credit, it seems, was upon the
ebb before, but I, that had no knowledge of things and nobody to
consult with, knew nothing of it, and so lost my money.

In the next place, when a woman is thus left desolate and void of
counsel, she is just like a bag of money or a jewel dropped on the
highway, which is a prey to the next comer; if a man of virtue and
upright principles happens to find it, he will have it cried, and the
owner may come to hear of it again; but how many times shall such a
thing fall into hands that will make no scruple of seizing it for their
own, to once that it shall come into good hands?

This was evidently my case, for I was now a loose, unguided creature,
and had no help, no assistance, no guide for my conduct; I knew what I
aimed at and what I wanted, but knew nothing how to pursue the end by
direct means.  I wanted to be placed in a settle state of living, and
had I happened to meet with a sober, good husband, I should have been
as faithful and true a wife to him as virtue itself could have formed.
If I had been otherwise, the vice came in always at the door of
necessity, not at the door of inclination; and I understood too well,
by the want of it, what the value of a settled life was, to do anything
to forfeit the felicity of it; nay, I should have made the better wife
for all the difficulties I had passed through, by a great deal; nor did
I in any of the time that I had been a wife give my husbands the least
uneasiness on account of my behaviour.

But all this was nothing; I found no encouraging prospect.  I waited; I
lived regularly, and with as much frugality as became my circumstances,
but nothing offered, nothing presented, and the main stock wasted
apace.  What to do I knew not; the terror of approaching poverty lay
hard upon my spirits.  I had some money, but where to place it I knew
not, nor would the interest of it maintain me, at least not in London.

At length a new scene opened.  There was in the house where I lodged a
north-country woman that went for a gentlewoman, and nothing was more
frequent in her discourse than her account of the cheapness of
provisions, and the easy way of living in her country; how plentiful
and how cheap everything was, what good company they kept, and the
like; till at last I told her she almost tempted me to go and live in
her country; for I that was a widow, though I had sufficient to live
on, yet had no way of increasing it; and that I found I could not live
here under #100 a year, unless I kept no company, no servant, made no
appearance, and buried myself in privacy, as if I was obliged to it by
necessity.

I should have observed, that she was always made to believe, as
everybody else was, that I was a great fortune, or at least that I had
three or four thousand pounds, if not more, and all in my own hands;
and she was mighty sweet upon me when she thought me inclined in the
least to go into her country.  She said she had a sister lived near
Liverpool, that her brother was a considerable gentleman there, and had
a great estate also in Ireland; that she would go down there in about
two months, and if I would give her my company thither, I should be as
welcome as herself for a month or more as I pleased, till I should see
how I liked the country; and if I thought fit to live there, she would
undertake they would take care, though they did not entertain lodgers
themselves, they would recommend me to some agreeable family, where I
should be placed to my content.

If this woman had known my real circumstances, she would never have
laid so many snares, and taken so many weary steps to catch a poor
desolate creature that was good for little when it was caught; and
indeed I, whose case was almost desperate, and thought I could not be
much worse, was not very anxious about what might befall me, provided
they did me no personal injury; so I suffered myself, though not
without a great deal of invitation and great professions of sincere
friendship and real kindness--I say, I suffered myself to be prevailed
upon to go with her, and accordingly I packed up my baggage, and put
myself in a posture for a journey, though I did not absolutely know
whither I was to go.

And now I found myself in great distress; what little I had in the
world was all in money, except as before, a little plate, some linen,
and my clothes; as for my household stuff, I had little or none, for I
had lived always in lodgings; but I had not one friend in the world
with whom to trust that little I had, or to direct me how to dispose of
it, and this perplexed me night and day.  I thought of the bank, and of
the other companies in London, but I had no friend to commit the
management of it to, and keep and carry about with me bank bills,
tallies, orders, and such things, I looked upon at as unsafe; that if
they were lost, my money was lost, and then I was undone; and, on the
other hand, I might be robbed and perhaps murdered in a strange place
for them.  This perplexed me strangely, and what to do I knew not.

It came in my thoughts one morning that I would go to the bank myself,
where I had often been to receive the interest of some bills I had,
which had interest payable on them, and where I had found a clerk, to
whom I applied myself, very honest and just to me, and particularly so
fair one time that when I had mistold my money, and taken less than my
due, and was coming away, he set me to rights and gave me the rest,
which he might have put into his own pocket.

I went to him and represented my case very plainly, and asked if he
would trouble himself to be my adviser, who was a poor friendless
widow, and knew not what to do.  He told me, if I desired his opinion
of anything within the reach of his business, he would do his endeavour
that I should not be wronged, but that he would also help me to a good
sober person who was a grave man of his acquaintance, who was a clerk
in such business too, though not in their house, whose judgment was
good, and whose honesty I might depend upon.  'For,' added he, 'I will
answer for him, and for every step he takes; if he wrongs you, madam,
of one farthing, it shall lie at my door, I will make it good; and he
delights to assist people in such cases--he does it as an act of
charity.'

I was a little at a stand in this discourse; but after some pause I
told him I had rather have depended upon him, because I had found him
honest, but if that could not be, I would take his recommendation
sooner than any one's else.  'I dare say, madam,' says he, 'that you
will be as well satisfied with my friend as with me, and he is
thoroughly able to assist you, which I am not.'  It seems he had his
hands full of the business of the bank, and had engaged to meddle with
no other business that that of his office, which I heard afterwards,
but did not understand then.  He added, that his friend should take
nothing of me for his advice or assistance, and this indeed encouraged
me very much.

He appointed the same evening, after the bank was shut and business
over, for me to meet him and his friend.  And indeed as soon as I saw
his friend, and he began but to talk of the affair, I was fully
satisfied that I had a very honest man to deal with; his countenance
spoke it, and his character, as I heard afterwards, was everywhere so
good, that I had no room for any more  doubts upon me.

After the first meeting, in which I only said what I had said before,
we parted, and he appointed me to come the next day to him, telling me
I might in the meantime satisfy myself of him by inquiry, which,
however, I knew not how well to do, having no acquaintance myself.

Accordingly I met him the next day, when I entered more freely with him
into my case.  I told him my circumstances at large:  that I was a
widow come over from America, perfectly desolate and friendless; that
I had a little money, and but a little, and was almost distracted for
fear of losing it, having no friend in the world to trust with the
management of it; that I was going into the north of England to live
cheap, that my stock might not waste; that I would willingly lodge my
money in the bank, but that I durst not carry the bills about me, and
the like, as above; and how to correspond about it, or with whom, I
knew not.

He told me I might lodge the money in the bank as an account, and its
being entered into the books would entitle me to the money at any time,
and if I was in the north I might draw bills on the cashier and receive
it when I would; but that then it would be esteemed as running cash,
and the bank would give no interest for it; that I might buy stock with
it, and so it would lie in store for me, but that then if I wanted to
dispose if it, I must come up to town on purpose to transfer it, and
even it would be with some difficulty I should receive the half-yearly
dividend, unless I was here in person, or had some friend I could trust
with having the stock in his name to do it for me, and that would have
the same difficulty in it as before; and with that he looked hard at me
and smiled a little.  At last, says he, 'Why do you not get a head
steward, madam, that may take you and your money together into keeping,
and then you would have the trouble taken off your hands?'  'Ay, sir,
and the money too, it may be,' said I; 'for truly I find the hazard
that way is as much as 'tis t'other way'; but I remember I said
secretly to myself, 'I wish you would ask me the question fairly, I
would consider very seriously on it before I said No.'

He went on a good way with me, and I thought once or twice he was in
earnest, but to my real affliction, I found at last he had a wife; but
when he owned he had a wife he shook his head, and said with some
concern, that indeed he had a wife, and no wife.  I began to think he
had been in the condition of my late lover, and that his wife had been
distempered or lunatic, or some such thing.  However, we had not much
more discourse at that time, but he told me he was in too much hurry of
business then, but that if I would come home to his house after their
business was over, he would by that time consider what might be done
for me, to put my affairs in a posture of security.  I told him I would
come, and desired to know where he lived.  He gave me a direction in
writing, and when he gave it me he read it to me, and said, 'There
'tis, madam, if you dare trust yourself with me.'  'Yes, sir,' said I,
'I believe I may venture to trust you with myself, for you have a wife,
you say, and I don't want a husband; besides, I dare trust you with my
money, which is all I have in the world, and if that were gone, I may
trust myself anywhere.'

He said some things in jest that were very handsome and mannerly, and
would have pleased me very well if they had been in earnest; but that
passed over, I took the directions, and appointed to attend him at his
house at seven o'clock the same evening.

When I came he made several proposals for my placing my money in the
bank, in order to my having interest for it; but still some difficulty
or other came in the way, which he objected as not safe; and I found
such a sincere disinterested honesty in him, that I began to muse with
myself, that I had certainly found the honest man I wanted, and that I
could never put myself into better hands; so I told him with a great
deal of frankness that I had never met with a man or woman yet that I
could trust, or in whom I could think myself safe, but that I saw he
was so disinterestedly concerned for my safety, that I said I would
freely trust him with the management of that little I had, if he would
accept to be steward for a poor widow that could give him no salary.

He smiled and, standing up, with great respect saluted me.  He told me
he could not but take it very kindly that I had so good an opinion of
him; that he would not deceive me, that he would do anything in his
power to serve me, and expect no salary; but that he could not by any
means accept of a trust, that it might bring him to be suspected of
self-interest, and that if I should die he might have disputes with my
executors, which he should be very loth to encumber himself with.

I told him if those were all his objections I would soon remove them,
and convince him that there was not the least room for any difficulty;
for that, first, as for suspecting him, if ever I should do it, now is
the time to suspect him, and not put the trust into his hands, and
whenever I did suspect him, he could but throw it up then and refuse to
go any further.  Then, as to executors, I assured him I had no heirs,
nor any relations in England, and I should alter my condition before I
died, and then his trust and trouble should cease together, which,
however, I had no prospect of yet; but I told him if I died as I was,
it should be all his own, and he would deserve it by being so faithful
to me as I was satisfied he would be.

He changed his countenance at this discourse, and asked me how I came
to have so much good-will for him; and, looking very much pleased, said
he might very lawfully wish he was a single man for my sake.  I smiled,
and told him as he was not, my offer could have no design upon him in
it, and to wish, as he did, was not to be allowed, 'twas criminal to
his wife.

He told me I was wrong.  'For,' says he, 'madam, as I said before, I
have a wife and no wife, and 'twould be no sin to me to wish her
hanged, if that were all.'  'I know nothing of your circumstances that
way, sir,' said I; 'but it cannot be innocent to wish your wife dead.'
'I tell you,' says he again, 'she is a wife and no wife; you don't know
what I am, or what she is.'

'That's true,' said I; 'sir, I do not know what you are, but I believe
you to be an honest man, and that's the cause of all my confidence in
you.'

'Well, well,' says he, 'and so I am, I hope, too.  But I am something
else too, madam; for,' says he, 'to be plain with you, I am a cuckold,
and she is a whore.'  He spoke it in a kind of jest, but it was with
such an awkward smile, that I perceived it was what struck very close
to him, and he looked dismally when he said it.

'That alters the case indeed, sir,' said I, 'as to that part you were
speaking of; but a cuckold, you know, may be an honest man; it does not
alter that case at all.  Besides, I think,' said I, 'since your wife is
so dishonest to you, you are too honest to her to own her for your
wife; but that,' said I, 'is what I have nothing to do with.'

'Nay,' says he, 'I do not think to clear my hands of her; for, to be
plain with you, madam,' added he, 'I am no contended cuckold neither:
on the other hand, I assure you it provokes me the highest degree, but
I can't help myself; she that will be a whore, will be a whore.'

I waived the discourse and began to talk of my business; but I found he
could not have done with it, so I let him alone, and he went on to tell
me all the circumstances of his case, too long to relate here;
particularly, that having been out of England some time before he came
to the post he was in, she had had two children in the meantime by an
officer of the army; and that when he came to England and, upon her
submission, took her again, and maintained her very well, yet she ran
away from him with a linen-draper's apprentice, robbed him of what she
could come at, and continued to live from him still.  'So that, madam,'
says he, 'she is a whore not by necessity, which is the common bait of
your sex, but by inclination, and for the sake of the vice.'

Well, I pitied him, and wished him well rid of her, and still would
have talked of my business, but it would not do.  At last he looks
steadily at me.  'Look you, madam,' says he, 'you came to ask advice of
me, and I will serve you as faithfully as if you were my own sister;
but I must turn the tables, since you oblige me to do it, and are so
friendly to me, and I think I must ask advice of you.  Tell me, what
must a poor abused fellow do with a whore?  What can I do to do myself
justice upon her?'

'Alas! sir,' says I, ''tis a case too nice for me to advise in, but it
seems she has run away from you, so you are rid of her fairly; what can
you desire more?'  'Ay, she is gone indeed,' said he, 'but I am not
clear of her for all that.'

'That's true,' says I; 'she may indeed run you into debt, but the law
has furnished you with methods to prevent that also; you may cry her
down, as they call it.'

'No, no,' says he, 'that is not the case neither; I have taken care of
all that; 'tis not that part that I speak of, but I would be rid of her
so that I might marry again.'

'Well, sir,' says I, 'then you must divorce her.  If you can prove what
you say, you may certainly get that done, and then, I suppose, you are
free.'

'That's very tedious and expensive,' says he.

'Why,' says I, 'if you can get any woman you like to take your word, I
suppose your wife would not dispute the liberty with you that she takes
herself.'

'Ay,' says he, 'but 'twould be hard to bring an honest woman to do
that; and for the other sort,' says he, 'I have had enough of her to
meddle with any more whores.'

It occurred to me presently, 'I would have taken your word with all my
heart, if you had but asked me the question'; but that was to myself.
To him I replied, 'Why, you shut the door against any honest woman
accepting you, for you condemn all that should venture upon you at
once, and conclude, that really a woman that takes you now can't be
honest.'

'Why,' says he, 'I wish you would satisfy me that an honest woman would
take me; I'd venture it'; and then turns short upon me, 'Will you take
me, madam?'

'That's not a fair question,' says I, 'after what you have said;
however, lest you should think I wait only for a recantation of it, I
shall answer you plainly, No, not I; my business is of another kind
with you, and I did not expect you would have turned my serious
application to you, in my own distracted case, into a comedy.'

'Why, madam,' says he, 'my case is as distracted as yours can be, and I
stand in as much need of advice as you do, for I think if I have not
relief somewhere, I shall be made myself, and I know not what course to
take, I protest to you.'

'Why, sir,' says I, ''tis easy to give advice in your case, much easier
than it is in mine.'  'Speak then,' says he, 'I beg of you, for now you
encourage me.'

'Why,' says I, 'if your case is so plain as you say it is, you may be
legally divorced, and then you may find honest women enough to ask the
question of fairly; the sex is not so scarce that you can want a wife.'

'Well, then,' said he, 'I am in earnest; I'll take your advice; but
shall I ask you one question seriously beforehand?'

'Any question,' said I, 'but that you did before.'

'No, that answer will not do,' said he, 'for, in short, that is the
question I shall ask.'

'You may ask what questions you please, but you have my answer to that
already,' said I.  'Besides, sir,' said I, 'can you think so ill of me
as that I would give any answer to such a question beforehand?  Can any
woman alive believe you in earnest, or think you design anything but to
banter her?'

'Well, well,' says he, 'I do not banter you, I am in earnest; consider
of it.'

'But, sir,' says I, a little gravely, 'I came to you about my own
business; I beg of you to let me know, what you will advise me to do?'

'I will be prepared,' says he, 'against you come again.'

'Nay,' says I, 'you have forbid my coming any more.'

'Why so?' said he, and looked a little surprised.

'Because,' said I, 'you can't expect I should visit you on the account
you talk of.'

'Well,' says he, 'you shall promise me to come again, however, and I
will not say any more of it till I have gotten the divorce, but I
desire you will prepare to be better conditioned when that's done, for
you shall be the woman, or I will not be divorced at all; why, I owe it
to your unlooked-for kindness, if it were to nothing else, but I have
other reasons too.'

He could not have said anything in the world that pleased me better;
however, I knew that the way to secure him was to stand off while the
thing was so remote, as it appeared to be, and that it was time enough
to accept of it when he was able to perform it; so I said very
respectfully to him, it was time enough to consider of these things
when he was in a condition to talk of them; in the meantime, I told
him, I was going a great way from him, and he would find objects enough
to please him better.  We broke off here for the present, and he made
me promise him to come again the next day, for his resolutions upon my
own business, which after some pressing I did; though had he seen
farther into me, I wanted no pressing on that account.

I came the next evening, accordingly, and brought my maid with me, to
let him see that I kept a maid, but I sent her away as soon as I was
gone in.  He would have had me let the maid have stayed, but I would
not, but ordered her aloud to come for me again about nine o'clock.
But he forbade that, and told me he would see me safe home, which, by
the way, I was not very well pleased with, supposing he might do that to
know where I lived and inquire into my character and circumstances.
However, I ventured that, for all that the people there or thereabout
knew of me, was to my advantage; and all the character he had of me,
after he had inquired, was that I was a woman of fortune, and that I
was a very modest, sober body; which, whether true or not in the main,
yet you may see how necessary it is for all women who expect anything
in the world, to preserve the character of their virtue, even when
perhaps they may have sacrificed the thing itself.

I found, and was not a little please with it, that he had provided a
supper for me.  I found also he lived very handsomely, and had a house
very handsomely furnished; all of which I was rejoiced at indeed, for I
looked upon it as all my own.

We had now a second conference upon the subject-matter of the last
conference.  He laid his business very home indeed; he protested his
affection to me, and indeed I had no room to doubt it; he declared that
it began from the first moment I talked with him, and long before I had
mentioned leaving my effects with him.  ''Tis no matter when it began,'
thought I; 'if it will but hold, 'twill be well enough.'  He then told
me how much the offer I had made of trusting him with my effects, and
leaving them to him, had engaged him.  'So I intended it should,'
thought I, 'but then I thought you had been a single man too.'  After
we had supped, I observed he pressed me very hard to drink two or three
glasses of wine, which, however, I declined, but drank one glass or
two.  He then told me he had a proposal to make to me, which I should
promise him I would not take ill if I should not grant it.  I told him
I hoped he would make no dishonourable proposal to me, especially in
his own house, and that if it was such, I desired he would not propose
it, that I might not be obliged to offer any resentment to him that did
not become the respect I professed for him, and the trust I had placed
in him in coming to his house; and begged of him he would give me leave
to go away, and accordingly began to put on my gloves and prepare to be
gone, though at the same time I no more intended it than he intended to
let me.

Well, he importuned me not to talk of going; he assured me he had no
dishonourable thing in his thoughts about me, and was very far from
offering anything to me that was dishonourable, and if I thought so, he
would choose to say no more of it.

That part I did not relish at all.  I told him I was ready to hear
anything that he had to say, depending that he would say nothing
unworthy of himself, or unfit for me to hear.  Upon this, he told me
his proposal was this:  that I would marry him, though he had not yet
obtained the divorce from the whore his wife; and to satisfy me that he
meant honourably, he would promise not to desire me to live with him,
or go to bed with him till the divorce was obtained.  My heart said yes
to this offer at first word, but it was necessary to play the hypocrite
a little more with him; so I seemed to decline the motion with some
warmth, and besides a little condemning the thing as unfair, told him
that such a proposal could be of no signification, but to entangle us
both in great difficulties; for if he should not at last obtain the
divorce, yet we could not dissolve the marriage, neither could we
proceed in it; so that if he was disappointed in the divorce, I left
him to consider what a condition we should both be in.

In short, I carried on the argument against this so far, that I
convinced him it was not a proposal that had any sense in it.  Well,
then he went from it to another, and that was, that I would sign and
seal a contract with him, conditioning to marry him as soon as the
divorce was obtained, and to be void if he could not obtain it.

I told him such a thing was more rational than the other; but as this
was the first time that ever I could imagine him weak enough to be in
earnest in this affair, I did not use to say Yes at first asking; I
would consider of it.

I played with this lover as an angler does with a trout.  I found I had
him fast on the hook, so I jested with his new proposal, and put him
off.  I told him he knew little of me, and bade him inquire about me; I
let him also go home with me to my lodging, though I would not ask him
to go in, for I told him it was not decent.

In short, I ventured to avoid signing a contract of marriage, and the
reason why I did it was because the lady that had invited me so
earnestly to go with her into Lancashire insisted so positively upon
it, and promised me such great fortunes, and such fine things there,
that I was tempted to go and try.  'Perhaps,' said I, 'I may mend
myself very much'; and then I made no scruple in my thoughts of
quitting my honest citizen, whom I was not so much in love with as not
to leave him for a richer.

In a word, I avoided a contract; but told him I would go into the
north, that he should know where to write to me by the consequence of
the business I had entrusted with him; that I would give him a
sufficient pledge of my respect for him, for I would leave almost all I
had in the world in his hands; and I would thus far give him my word,
that as soon as he had sued out a divorce from his first wife, he would
send me an account of it, I would come up to London, and that then we
would talk seriously of the matter.

It was a base design I went with, that I must confess, though I was
invited thither with a design much worse than mine was, as the sequel
will discover.  Well, I went with my friend, as I called her, into
Lancashire.  All the way we went she caressed me with the utmost
appearance of a sincere, undissembled affection; treated me, except my
coach-hire, all the way; and her brother brought a gentleman's coach to
Warrington to receive us, and we were carried from thence to Liverpool
with as much ceremony as I could desire.  We were also entertained at a
merchant's house in Liverpool three or four days very handsomely; I
forbear to tell his name, because of what followed.  Then she told me
she would carry me to an uncle's house of hers, where we should be
nobly entertained.  She did so; her uncle, as she called him, sent a
coach and four horses for us, and we were carried near forty miles I
know not whither.

We came, however, to a gentleman's seat, where was a numerous family, a
large park, extraordinary company indeed, and where she was called
cousin.  I told her if she had resolved to bring me into such company
as this, she should have let me have prepared myself, and have
furnished myself with better clothes.  The ladies took notice of that,
and told me very genteelly they did not value people in their country
so much by their clothes as they did in London; that their cousin had
fully informed them of my quality, and that I did not want clothes to
set me off; in short, they entertained me, not like what I was, but
like what they thought I had been, namely, a widow lady of a great
fortune.

The first discovery I made here was, that the family were all Roman
Catholics, and the cousin too, whom I called my friend; however, I must
say that nobody in the world could behave better to me, and I had all
the civility shown me that I could have had if I had been of their
opinion.  The truth is, I had not so much principle of any kind as to
be nice in point of religion, and I presently learned to speak
favourably of the Romish Church; particularly, I told them I saw little
but the prejudice of education in all the difference that were among
Christians about religion, and if it had so happened that my father had
been a Roman Catholic, I doubted not but I should have been as well
pleased with their religion as my own.

This obliged them in the highest degree, and as I was besieged day and
night with good company and pleasant discourse, so I had two or three
old ladies that lay at me upon the subject of religion too.  I was so
complaisant, that though I would not completely engage, yet I made no
scruple to be present at their mass, and to conform to all their
gestures as they showed me the pattern, but I would not come too cheap;
so that I only in the main encouraged them to expect that I would turn
Roman Catholic, if I was instructed in the Catholic doctrine as they
called it, and so the matter rested.

I stayed here about six weeks; and then my conductor led me back to a
country village, about six miles from Liverpool, where her brother (as
she called him) came to visit me in his own chariot, and in a very good
figure, with two footmen in a good livery; and the next thing was to
make love to me.  As it had happened to me, one would think I could not
have been cheated, and indeed I thought so myself, having a safe card
at home, which I resolved not to quit unless I could mend myself very
much.  However, in all appearance this brother was a match worth my
listening to, and the least his estate was valued at was #1000 a year,
but the sister said it was worth #1500 a year, and  lay most of it in
Ireland.

I that was a great fortune, and passed for such, was above being asked
how much my estate was; and my false friend taking it upon a foolish
hearsay, had raised it from #500 to #5000, and by the time she came
into the country she called it  #15,000.  The Irishman, for such I
understood him to be, was stark mad at this bait; in short, he courted
me, made me presents, and ran in debt like a madman for the expenses of
his equipage and of  his courtship.  He had, to give him his due, the
appearance of an extraordinary fine gentleman; he was tall,
well-shaped, and had an extraordinary address; talked as naturally of
his park and his stables, of his horses, his gamekeepers, his woods,
his tenants, and his servants, as if we had been in the mansion-house,
and I had seen them all about me.

He never so much as asked me about my fortune or estate, but assured me
that when we came to Dublin he would jointure me in #600 a year good
land; and that we could enter into a deed of settlement or contract
here for the performance of it.

This was such language indeed as I had not been used to, and I was here
beaten out of all my measures; I had a she-devil in my bosom, every
hour telling me how great her brother lived.  One time she would come
for my orders, how I would have my coaches painted, and how lined; and
another time what clothes my page should wear; in short, my eyes were
dazzled.  I had now lost my power of saying No, and, to cut the story
short, I consented to be married; but to be the more private, we were
carried farther into the country, and married by a Romish clergyman,
who I was assured would marry us as effectually as a Church of England
parson.

I cannot say but I had some reflections in this affair upon the
dishonourable forsaking my faithful citizen, who loved me sincerely,
and who was endeavouring to quit himself of a scandalous whore by whom
he had been indeed barbarously used, and promised himself infinite
happiness in his new choice; which choice was now giving up herself to
another in a manner almost as scandalous as hers could be.

But the glittering shoe of a great estate, and of fine things, which
the deceived creature that was now my deceiver represented every hour
to my imagination, hurried me away, and gave me no time to think of
London, or of anything there, much less of the obligation I had to a
person of infinitely more real merit than what was now before me.

But the thing was done; I was now in the arms of my new spouse, who
appeared still the same as before; great even to magnificence, and
nothing less than #1000 a year could support the ordinary equipage he
appeared in.

After we had been married about a month, he began to talk of my going
to West Chester in order to embark for Ireland.  However, he did not
hurry me, for we stayed near three weeks longer, and then he sent to
Chester for a coach to meet us at the Black Rock, as they call it, over
against Liverpool.  Thither we went in a fine boat they call a pinnace,
with six oars; his servants, and horses, and baggage going in the
ferry-boat.  He made his excuse to me that he had no acquaintance in
Chester, but he would go before and get some handsome apartment for me
at a private house.  I asked him how long we should stay at Chester.
He said, not at all, any longer than one night or two, but he would
immediately hire a coach to go to Holyhead.  Then I told him he should
by no means give himself the trouble to get private lodgings for one
night or two, for that Chester being a great place, I made no doubt but
there would be very good inns and accommodation enough; so we lodged at
an inn in the West Street, not far from the Cathedral; I forget what
sign it was at.

Here my spouse, talking of my going to Ireland, asked me if I had no
affairs to settle at London before we went off.  I told him No, not of
any great consequence, but what might be done as well by letter from
Dublin.  'Madam,' says he, very respectfully, 'I suppose the greatest
part of your estate, which my sister tells me is most of it in money in
the Bank of England, lies secure enough, but in case it required
transferring, or any way altering its property, it might be necessary
to go up to London and settle those things before we went over.'

I seemed to look strange at it, and told him I knew not what he meant;
that I had no effects in the Bank of England that I knew of; and I
hoped he could not say that I had ever told him I had.  No, he said, I
had not told him so, but his sister had said the greatest part of my
estate lay there.  'And I only mentioned it, me dear,' said he, 'that
if there was any occasion to settle it, or order anything about it, we
might not be obliged to the hazard and trouble of another voyage back
again'; for he added, that he did not care to venture me too much upon
the sea.

I was surprised at this talk, and began to consider very seriously what
the meaning of it must be; and it presently occurred to me that my
friend, who called him brother, had represented me in colours which
were not my due; and I thought, since it was come to that pitch, that I
would know the bottom of it before I went out of England, and before I
should put myself into I knew not whose hands in a strange country.

Upon this I called his sister into my chamber the next morning, and
letting her know the discourse her brother and I had been upon the
evening before, I conjured her to tell me what she had said to him, and
upon what foot it was that she had made this marriage.  She owned that
she had told him that I was a great fortune, and said that she was told
so at London.  'Told so!' says I warmly; 'did I ever tell you so?'  No,
she said, it was true I did not tell her so, but I had said several
times that what I had was in my own disposal.  'I did so,' returned I
very quickly and hastily, 'but I never told you I had anything called a
fortune; no, not that I had #100, or the value of #100, in the world.
Any how did it consist with my being a fortune,' said I, 'that I should
come here into the north of England with you, only upon the account of
living cheap?' At these words, which I spoke warm and high, my husband,
her brother (as she called him), came into the room, and I desired him
to come and sit down, for I had something of moment to say before them
both, which it was absolutely necessary he should hear.

He looked a little disturbed at the assurance with which I seemed to
speak it, and came and sat down by me, having first shut the door; upon
which I began, for I was very much provoked, and turning myself to him,
'I am afraid,' says I, 'my dear' (for I spoke with kindness on his
side), 'that you have a very great abuse put upon you, and an injury
done you never to be repaired in your marrying me, which, however, as I
have had no hand in it, I desire I may be fairly acquitted of it, and
that the blame may lie where it ought to lie, and nowhere else, for I
wash my hands of every part of it.'

'What injury can be done me, my dear,' says he, 'in marrying you.  I
hope it is to my honour and advantage every way.'  'I will soon explain
it to you,' says I, 'and I fear you will have no reason to think
yourself well used; but I will convince you, my dear,' says I again,
'that I have had no hand in it'; and there I stopped a while.

He looked now scared and wild, and began, I believe, to suspect what
followed; however, looking towards me, and saying only, 'Go on,' he sat
silent, as if to hear what I had more to say; so I went on.  'I asked
you last night,' said I, speaking to him, 'if ever I made any boast to
you of my estate, or ever told you I had any estate in the Bank of
England or anywhere else, and you owned I had not, as is most true; and
I desire you will tell me here, before your sister, if ever I gave you
any reason from me to think so, or that ever we had any discourse about
it'; and he owned again I had not, but said I had appeared always as a
woman of fortune, and he depended on it that I was so, and hoped he was
not deceived.  'I am not inquiring yet whether you have been deceived
or not,' said I; 'I fear you have, and I too; but I am clearing myself
from the unjust charge of being concerned in deceiving you.

'I have been now asking your sister if ever I told her of any fortune
or estate I had, or gave her any particulars of it; and she owns I
never did.  Any pray, madam,' said I, turning myself to her, 'be so
just to me, before your brother, to charge me, if you can, if ever I
pretended to you that I had an estate; and why, if I had, should I come
down into this country with you on purpose to spare that little I had,
and live cheap?'  She could not deny one word, but said she had been
told in London that I had a very great fortune, and that it lay in the
Bank of England.

'And now, dear sir,' said I, turning myself to my new spouse again, 'be
so just to me as to tell me who has abused both you and me so much as
to make you believe I was a fortune, and prompt you to court me to this
marriage?'  He could not speak a word, but pointed to her; and, after
some more pause, flew out in the most furious passion that ever I saw a
man in my life, cursing her, and calling her all the whores and hard
names he could think of; and that she had ruined him, declaring that
she had told him I had #15,000, and that she was to have #500 of him
for procuring this match for him.  He then added, directing his speech
to me, that she was none of his sister, but had been his whore for two
years before, that she had had #100 of him in part of this bargain, and
that he was utterly undone if things were as I said; and in his raving
he swore he would let her heart's blood out immediately, which
frightened her and me too.  She cried, said she had been told so in the
house where I lodged.  But this aggravated him more than before, that
she should put so far upon him, and run things such a length upon no
other authority than a hearsay; and then, turning to me again, said
very honestly, he was afraid we were both undone.  'For, to be plain,
my dear, I have no estate,' says he; 'what little I had, this devil has
made me run out in waiting on you and putting me into this equipage.'
She took the opportunity of his being earnest in talking with me, and
got out of the room, and I never saw her more.

I was confounded now as much as he,  and knew not what to say.  I
thought many ways that I had the worst of it, but his saying he was
undone, and that he had no estate neither, put me into a mere
distraction.  'Why,' says I to him, 'this has been a hellish juggle,
for we are married here upon the foot of a double fraud; you are undone
by the disappointment, it seems; and if I had had a fortune I had been
cheated too, for you say you have nothing.'

'You would indeed have been cheated, my dear,' says he, 'but you would
not have been undone, for #15,000 would have maintained us both very
handsomely in this country; and I assure you,' added he, 'I had
resolved to have dedicated every groat of it to you; I would not have
wronged you of a shilling, and the rest I would have made up in my
affection to you, and tenderness of you, as long as I lived.'

This was very honest indeed, and I really believe he spoke as he
intended, and that he was a man that was as well qualified to make me
happy, as to his temper and behaviour, as any man ever was; but his
having no estate, and being run into debt on this ridiculous account in
the country, made all the prospect dismal and dreadful, and I knew not
what to say, or what to think of myself.

I told him it was very unhappy that so much love, and so much good
nature as I discovered in him, should be thus precipitated into misery;
that I saw nothing before us but ruin; for as to me, it was my
unhappiness that what little I had was not able to relieve us week, and
with that I pulled out a bank bill of #20 and eleven guineas, which I
told him I had saved out of  my little income, and that by the account
that creature had given me of the way of living in that country, I
expected it would maintain me three or four years; that if it was taken
from me, I was left destitute, and he knew what the condition of a
woman among strangers must be, if she had no money in her pocket;
however, I told him, if he would take it, there it was.

He told me with a great concern, and I thought I saw tears stand in his
eyes, that he would not touch it; that he abhorred the thoughts of
stripping me and make me miserable; that, on the contrary, he had fifty
guineas left, which was all he had in the world, and he pulled it out
and threw it down on the table, bidding me take it, though he were to
starve for want of it.

I returned, with the same concern for him, that I could not bear to
hear him talk so; that, on the contrary, if he could propose any
probable method of living, I would do anything that became me on my
part, and that I would live as close and as narrow as he could desire.

He begged of me to talk no more at that rate, for it would make him
distracted; he said he was bred a gentleman, though he was reduced to a
low fortune, and that there was but one way left which he could think
of, and that would not do, unless I could answer him one question,
which, however, he said he would not press me to.  I told him I would
answer it honestly; whether it would be to his satisfaction or not,
that I could not tell.

'Why, then, my dear, tell me plainly,' says he, 'will the little you
have keep us together in any figure, or in any station or place, or
will it not?'

It was my happiness hitherto that I had not discovered myself or my
circumstances at all--no, not so much as my name; and seeing these was
nothing to be expected from him, however good-humoured and however
honest he seemed to be, but to live on what I knew would soon be
wasted, I resolved to conceal everything but the bank bill and the
eleven guineas which I had owned; and I would have been very glad to
have lost that and have been set down where he took me up.  I had
indeed another bank bill about me of #30, which was the whole of what I
brought with me, as well to subsist on in the country, as not knowing
what might offer; because this creature, the go-between that had thus
betrayed us both, had made me believe strange things of my marrying to
my advantage in the country, and I was not willing to be without money,
whatever might happen.  This bill I concealed, and that made me the
freer of the rest, in consideration of his circumstances, for I really
pitied him heartily.

But to return to his question, I told him I never willingly deceived
him, and I never would.  I was very sorry to tell him that the little I
had would not subsist us; that it was not sufficient to subsist me
alone in the south country, and that this was the reason that made me
put myself into the hands of that woman who called him brother, she
having assured me that I might board very handsomely at a town called
Manchester, where I had not yet been, for about #6 a year; and my whole
income not being about #15 a year, I thought I might live easy upon it,
and wait for better things.

He shook his head and remained silent, and a very melancholy evening we
had; however, we supped together, and lay together that night, and when
we had almost supped he looked a little better and more cheerful, and
called for a bottle of wine.  'Come, my dear,' says he, 'though the
case is bad, it is to no purpose to be dejected.  Come, be as easy as
you can; I will endeavour to find out some way or other to live; if you
can but subsist yourself, that is better than nothing.  I must try the
world again; a man ought to think like a man; to be discouraged is to
yield to the misfortune.'  With this he filled a glass and drank to me,
holding my hand and pressing it hard in his hand all the while the wine
went down, and protesting afterwards his main concern was for me.

It was really a true, gallant spirit he was of, and it was the more
grievous to me.  'Tis something of relief even to be undone by a man of
honour, rather than by a scoundrel; but here the greatest
disappointment was on his side, for he had really spent a great deal of
money, deluded by this madam the procuress; and it was very remarkable
on what poor terms he proceeded.  First the baseness of the creature
herself is to be observed, who, for the getting #100 herself, could be
content to let him spend three or four more, though perhaps it was all
he had in the world, and more than all; when she had not the least
ground, more than a little tea-table chat, to say that I had any
estate, or was a fortune, or the like.  It is true the design of
deluding a woman of fortune, if I had been so, was base enough; the
putting the face of great things upon poor circumstances was a fraud,
and bad enough; but the case a little differed too, and that in his
favour, for he was not a rake that made a trade to delude women, and,
as some have done, get six or seven fortunes after one another, and
then rifle and run away from them; but he was really a gentleman,
unfortunate and low, but had lived well; and though, if I had had a
fortune, I should have been enraged at the slut for betraying me, yet
really for the man, a fortune would not have been ill bestowed on him,
for he was a lovely person indeed, of generous principles, good sense,
and of abundance of good-humour.

We had a great deal of close conversation that night, for we neither of
us slept much; he was as penitent for having put all those cheats upon
me as if it had been felony, and that he was going to execution; he
offered me again every shilling of the money he had about him, and said
he would go into the army and seek the world for more.

I asked him why he would be so unkind to carry me into Ireland, when I
might suppose he could not have subsisted me there.  He took me in his
arms.  'My dear,' said he, 'depend upon it, I never designed to go to
Ireland at all, much less to have carried you thither, but came hither
to be out of the observation of the people, who had heard what I
pretended to, and withal, that nobody might ask me for money before I
was furnished to supply them.'

'But where, then,' said I, 'were we to have gone next?'

'Why, my dear,' said he, 'I'll confess the whole scheme to you as I had
laid it; I purposed here to ask you something about your estate, as you
see I did, and when you, as I expected you would, had entered into some
account with me of the particulars, I would have made an excuse to you
to have put off our voyage to Ireland for some time, and to have gone
first towards London.

'Then, my dear,' said he, 'I resolved to have confessed all the
circumstances of my own affairs to you, and let you know I had indeed
made use of these artifices to obtain your consent to marry me, but had
now nothing to do but ask to your pardon, and to tell you how
abundantly, as I have said above, I would endeavour to make you forget
what was past, by the felicity of the days to come.'

'Truly,' said I to him, 'I find you would soon have conquered me; and
it is my affliction now, that I am not in a condition to let you see
how easily I should have been reconciled to you, and have passed by all
the tricks you had put upon me, in recompense of so much good-humour.
But, my dear,' said I, 'what can we do now?  We are both undone, and
what better are we for our being reconciled together, seeing we have
nothing to live on?'

We proposed a great many things, but nothing could offer where there
was nothing to begin with.  He begged me at last to talk no more of it,
for, he said, I would break his heart; so we talked of other things a
little, till at last he took a husband's leave of me, and so we went to
sleep.

He rose before me in the morning; and indeed, having lain awake almost
all night, I was very sleepy, and lay till near eleven o'clock.  In
this time he took his horses and three servants, and all his linen and
baggage, and away he went, leaving a short but moving letter for me on
the table, as follows:--


'MY DEAR--I am a dog; I have abused you; but I have been drawn into do
it by a base creature, contrary to my principle and the general
practice of my life.  Forgive me, my dear!  I ask your pardon with the
greatest sincerity; I am the most miserable of men, in having deluded
you.  I have been so happy to possess you, and now am so wretched as to
be forced to fly from you.  Forgive me, my dear; once more I say,
forgive me!  I am not able to see you ruined by me, and myself unable
to support you.  Our marriage is nothing; I shall never be able to see
you again; I here discharge you from it; if you can marry to your
advantage, do not decline it on my account; I here swear to you on my
faith, and on the word of a man of honour, I will never disturb your
repose if I should know of it, which, however, is not likely.  On the
other hand, if you should not marry, and if good fortune should befall
me, it shall be all yours, wherever you are.

'I have put some of the stock of money I have left into your pocket;
take places for yourself and your maid in the stage-coach, and go for
London; I hope it will bear your charges thither, without breaking into
your own.  Again I sincerely ask your pardon, and will do so as often
as I shall ever think of you.  Adieu, my dear, for ever!--I am, your
most affectionately, J.E.'


Nothing that ever befell me in my life sank so deep into my heart as
this farewell.  I reproached him a thousand times in my thoughts for
leaving me, for I would have gone with him through the world, if I had
begged my bread.  I felt in my pocket, and there found ten guineas, his
gold watch, and two little rings, one a small diamond ring worth only
about #6, and the other a plain gold ring.

I sat me down and looked upon these things two hours together, and
scarce spoke a word, till my maid interrupted me by telling me my
dinner was ready.  I ate but little, and after dinner I fell into a
vehement fit of crying, every now and then calling him by his name,
which was James.  'O Jemmy!' said I, 'come back, come back.  I'll give
you all I have; I'll beg, I'll starve with you.'  And thus I ran raving
about the room several times, and then sat down between whiles, and
then walking about again, called upon him to come back, and then cried
again; and thus I passed the afternoon, till about seven o'clock, when
it was near dusk, in the evening, being August, when, to my unspeakable
surprise, he comes back into the inn, but without a servant, and comes
directly up into my chamber.

I was in the greatest confusion imaginable, and so was he too.  I could
not imagine what should be the occasion of it, and began to be at odds
with myself whether to be glad or sorry; but my affection biassed all
the rest, and it was impossible to conceal my joy, which was too great
for smiles, for it burst out into tears.  He was no sooner entered the
room but he ran to me and took me in his arms, holding me fast, and
almost stopping my breath with his kisses, but spoke not a word.  At
length I began.  'My dear,' said I, 'how could you go away from me?' to
which he gave no answer, for it was impossible for him to speak.

When our ecstasies were a little over, he told me he was gone about
fifteen miles, but it was not in his power to go any farther without
coming back to see me again, and to take his leave of me once more.

I told him how I had passed my time, and how loud I had called him to
come back again.  He told me he heard me very plain upon Delamere
Forest, at a place about twelve miles off.  I smiled.   'Nay,' says he,
'do not think I am in jest, for if ever I heard your voice in my life,
I heard you call me aloud, and sometimes I thought I saw you running
after me.'  'Why,' said I, 'what did I say?'--for I had not named the
words to him.  'You called aloud,' says he, 'and said, O Jemmy!  O
Jemmy!  come back, come back.'

I laughed at him.  'My dear,' says he, 'do not laugh, for, depend upon
it, I heard your voice as plain as you hear mine now; if you please,
I'll go before a magistrate and make oath of it.'  I then began to be
amazed and surprised, and indeed frightened, and told him what I had
really done, and how I had called after him, as above.

When we had amused ourselves a while about this, I said to him:  'Well,
you shall go away from me no more; I'll go all over the world with you
rather.'  He told me it would be a very difficult thing for him to leave
me, but since it must be, he hoped I would make it as easy to me as I
could; but as for him, it would be his destruction that he foresaw.

However, he told me that he considered he had left me to travel to
London alone, which was too long a journey; and that as he might as
well go that way as any way else, he was resolved to see me safe
thither, or near it; and if he did go away then without taking his
leave, I should not take it ill of him; and this he made me promise.

He told me how he had dismissed his three servants, sold their horses,
and sent the fellows away to seek their fortunes, and all in a little
time, at a town on the road, I know not where.  'And,' says he, 'it
cost me some tears all alone by myself, to think how much happier they
were than their master, for they could go to the next gentleman's house
to see for a service, whereas,' said he, 'I knew not wither to go, or
what to do with myself.'

I told him I was so completely miserable in parting with him, that I
could not be worse; and that now he was come again, I would not go from
him, if he would take me with him, let him go whither he would, or do
what he would.  And in the meantime I agreed that we would go together
to London; but I could not be brought to consent he should go away at
last and not take his leave of me, as he proposed to do; but told him,
jesting, that if he did, I would call him back again as loud as I did
before.  Then I pulled out his watch and gave it him back, and his two
rings, and his ten guineas; but he would not take them, which made me
very much suspect that he resolved to go off upon the road and leave me.

The truth is, the circumstances he was in, the passionate expressions
of his letter, the kind, gentlemanly treatment I had from him in all
the affair, with the concern he showed for me in it, his manner of
parting with that large share which he gave me of his little stock
left--all these had joined to make such impressions on me, that I
really loved him most tenderly, and could not bear the thoughts of
parting with him.

Two days after this we quitted Chester, I in the stage-coach, and he on
horseback.  I dismissed my maid at Chester.  He was very much against
my being without a maid, but she being a servant hired in the country,
and I resolving to keep no servant at London, I told him it would have
been barbarous to have taken the poor wench and have turned her away as
soon as I came to town; and it would also have been a needless charge
on the road, so I satisfied him, and he was easy enough on the score.

He came with me as far as Dunstable, within thirty miles of London, and
then he told me fate and his own misfortunes obliged him to leave me,
and that it was not convenient for him to go to London, for reasons
which it was of no value to me to know, and I saw him preparing to go.
The stage-coach we were in did not usually stop at Dunstable, but I
desiring it but for a quart of an hour, they were content to stand at
an inndoor a while, and we went into the house.

Being in the inn, I told him I had but one favour more to ask of him,
and that was, that since he could not go any farther, he would give me
leave to stay a week or two in the town with him, that we might in that
time think of something to prevent such a ruinous thing to us both, as
a final separation would be; and that I had something of moment to
offer him, that I had never said yet, and which perhaps he might find
practicable to our mutual advantage.

This was too reasonable a proposal to be denied, so he called the
landlady of the house, and told her his wife was taken ill, and so ill
that she could not think of going any farther in the stage-coach, which
had tired her almost to death, and asked if she could not get us a
lodging for two or three days in a private house, where I might rest me
a little, for the journey had been too much for me.  The landlady, a
good sort of woman, well-bred and very obliging, came immediately to
see me; told me she had two or three very good rooms in a part of the
house quite out of the noise, and if I saw them, she did not doubt but
I would like them, and I should have one of her maids, that should do
nothing else but be appointed to wait on me.  This was so very kind,
that I could not but accept of it, and thank her; so I went to look on
the rooms and liked them very well, and indeed they were
extraordinarily furnished, and very pleasant lodgings; so we paid the
stage-coach, took out our baggage, and resolved to stay here a while.

Here I told him I would live with him now till all my money was spent,
but would not let him spend a shilling of his own.  We had some kind
squabble about that, but I told him it was the last time I was like to
enjoy his company, and I desired he would let me be master in that
thing only, and he should govern in everything else; so he acquiesced.

Here one evening, taking a walk into the fields, I told him I would now
make the proposal to him I had told him of; accordingly I related to
him how I had lived in Virginia, that I had a mother I believed was
alive there still, though my husband was dead some years.  I told him
that had not my effects miscarried, which, by the way, I magnified
pretty much, I might have been fortune good enough to him to have kept
us from being parted in this manner.  Then I entered into the manner of
peoples going over to those countries to settle, how they had a
quantity of land given them by the Constitution of the place; and if
not, that it might be purchased at so easy a rate this it was not worth
naming.

I then gave him a full and distinct account of the nature of planting;
how with carrying over but two or three hundred pounds value in English
goods, with some servants and tools, a man of application would
presently lay a foundation for a family, and in a very few years be
certain to raise an estate.

I let him into the nature of the product of the earth; how the ground
was cured and prepared, and what the usual increase of it was; and
demonstrated to him, that in a very few years, with such a beginning,
we should be as certain of being rich as we were now certain of being
poor.

He was surprised at my discourse; for we made it the whole subject of
our conversation for near a week together, in which time I laid it down
in black and white, as we say, that it was morally impossible, with a
supposition of any reasonable good conduct, but that we must thrive
there and do very well.

Then I told him what measures I would take to raise such a sum of #300
or thereabouts; and I argued with him how good a method it would be to
put an end to our misfortunes and restore our circumstances in the
world, to what we had both expected; and I added, that after seven
years, if we lived, we might be in a posture to leave our plantations
in good hands, and come over again and receive the income of it, and
live here and enjoy it; and I gave him examples of some that had done
so, and lived now in very good circumstances in London.

In short, I pressed him so to it, that he almost agreed to it, but
still something or other broke it off again; till at last he turned the
tables, and he began to talk almost to the same purpose of Ireland.

He told me that a man that could confine himself to country life, and
that could find but stock to enter upon any land, should have farms
there for #50 a year, as good as were here let for #200 a year; that
the produce was such, and so rich the land, that if much was not laid
up, we were sure to live as handsomely upon it as a gentleman of #3000
a year could do in England and that he had laid a scheme to leave me in
London, and go over and try; and if he found he could lay a handsome
foundation of living suitable to the respect he had for me, as he
doubted not he should do, he would come over and fetch me.

I was dreadfully afraid that upon such a proposal he would have taken
me at my word, viz. to sell my little income as I called it, and turn
it into money, and let him carry it over into Ireland and try his
experiment with it; but he was too just to desire it, or to have
accepted it if I had offered it; and he anticipated me in that, for he
added, that he would go and try his fortune that way, and if he found
he could do anything at it to live, then, by adding mine to it when I
went over, we should live like ourselves; but that he would not hazard
a shilling of mine till he had made the experiment with a little, and
he assured me that if he found nothing to be done in Ireland, he would
then come to me and join in my project for Virginia.

He was so earnest upon his project being to be tried first, that I
could not withstand him; however, he promised to let me hear from him
in a very little time after his arriving there, to let me know whether
his prospect answered his design, that if there was not a possibility
of success, I might take the occasion to prepare for our other voyage,
and then, he assured me, he would go with me to America with all his
heart.

I could bring him to nothing further than this.  However, those
consultations entertained us near a month, during which I enjoyed his
company, which indeed was the most entertaining that ever I met in my
life before.  In this time he let me into the whole story of his own
life, which was indeed surprising, and full of an infinite variety
sufficient to fill up a much brighter history, for its adventures and
incidents, than any I ever saw in print; but I shall have occasion to
say more of him hereafter.

We parted at last, though with the utmost reluctance on my side; and
indeed he took his leave very unwillingly too, but necessity obliged
him, for his reasons were very good why he would not come to London, as
I understood more fully some time afterwards.

I gave him a direction how to write to me, though still I reserved the
grand secret, and never broke my resolution, which was not to let him
ever know my true name, who I was, or where to be found; he likewise
let me know how to write a letter to him, so that, he said, he would be
sure to receive it.

I came to London the next day after we parted, but did not go directly
to my old lodgings; but for another nameless reason took a private
lodging in St. John's Street, or, as it is vulgarly called, St.
Jones's, near Clerkenwell; and here, being perfectly alone, I had
leisure to sit down and reflect seriously upon the last seven months'
ramble I had made, for I had been abroad no less.  The pleasant hours I
had with my last husband I looked back on with an infinite deal of
pleasure; but that pleasure was very much lessened when I found some
time after that I was really with child.

This was a perplexing thing, because of the difficulty which was before
me where I should get leave to lie in; it being one of the nicest
things in the world at that time of day for a woman that was a
stranger, and had no friends, to be entertained in that circumstance
without security, which, by the way, I had not, neither could I procure
any.

I had taken care all this while to preserve a correspondence with my
honest friend at the bank, or rather he took care to correspond with
me, for he wrote to me once a week; and though I had not spent my money
so fast as to want any from him, yet I often wrote also to let him know
I was alive.  I had left directions in Lancashire, so that I had these
letters, which he sent, conveyed to me; and during my recess at St.
Jones's received a very obliging letter from him, assuring me that his
process for a divorce from his wife went on with success, though he met
with some difficulties in it that he did not expect.

I was not displeased with the news that his process was more tedious
than he expected; for though I was in no condition to have him yet, not
being so foolish to marry him when I knew myself to be with child by
another man, as some I know have ventured to do, yet I was not willing
to lose him, and, in a word, resolved to have him if he continued in
the same mind, as soon as I was up again; for I saw apparently I should
hear no more from my husband; and as he had all along pressed to marry,
and had assured me he would not be at all disgusted at it, or ever
offer to claim me again, so I made no scruple to resolve to do it if I
could, and if my other friend stood to his bargain; and I had a great
deal of reason to be assured that he would stand to it, by the letters
he wrote to me, which were the kindest and most obliging that could be.

I now grew big, and the people where I lodged perceived it, and began
to take notice of it to me, and, as far as civility would allow,
intimated that I must think of removing.  This put me to extreme
perplexity, and I grew very melancholy, for indeed I knew not what
course to take.  I had money, but no friends, and was like to have a
child upon my hands to keep, which was a difficulty I had never had
upon me yet, as the particulars of my story hitherto make appear.

In the course of this affair I fell very ill, and my melancholy really
increased my distemper; my illness proved at length to be only an ague,
but my apprehensions were really that I should miscarry.  I should not
say apprehensions, for indeed I would have been glad to miscarry, but I
could never be brought to entertain so much as a thought of
endeavouring to miscarry, or of taking any thing to make me miscarry; I
abhorred, I say, so much as the thought of it.

However, speaking of it in the house, the gentlewoman who kept the
house proposed to me to send for a midwife.  I scrupled it at first,
but after some time consented to it, but told her I had no particular
acquaintance with any midwife, and so left it to her.

It seems the mistress of the house was not so great a stranger to such
cases as mine was as I thought at first she had been, as will appear
presently, and she sent for a midwife of the right sort--that is to
say, the right sort for me.

The woman appeared to be an experienced woman in her business, I mean
as a midwife; but she had another calling too, in which she was as
expert as most women if not more.  My landlady had told her I was very
melancholy, and that she believed that had done me harm; and once,
before me, said to her, 'Mrs. B----' (meaning the midwife), 'I believe
this lady's trouble is of a kind that is pretty much in your way, and
therefore if you can do anything for her, pray do, for she is a very
civil gentlewoman'; and so she went out of the room.

I really did not understand her, but my Mother Midnight began very
seriously to explain what she meant, as soon as she was gone.  'Madam,'
says she, 'you seem not to understand what your landlady means; and
when you do understand it, you need not let her know at all that you do
so.

'She means that you are under some circumstances that may render your
lying in difficult to you, and that you are not willing to be exposed.
I need say no more, but to tell you, that if you think fit to
communicate so much of your case to me, if it be so, as is necessary,
for I do not desire to pry into those things, I perhaps may be in a
position to help you and to make you perfectly easy, and remove all
your dull thoughts upon that subject.'

Every word this creature said was a cordial to me, and put new life and
new spirit into my heart; my blood began to circulate immediately, and
I was quite another body; I ate my victuals again, and grew better
presently after it.  She said a great deal more to the same purpose,
and then, having pressed me to be free with her, and promised in the
solemnest manner to be secret, she stopped a little, as if waiting to
see what impression it made on me, and what I would say.

I was too sensible to the want I was in of such a woman, not to accept
her offer; I told her my case was partly as she guessed, and partly
not, for I was really married, and had a husband, though he was in such
fine circumstances and so remote at that time, as that he could not
appear publicly.

She took me short, and told me that was none of her business; all the
ladies that came under her care were married women to her.  'Every
woman,' she says, 'that is with child has a father for it,' and whether
that father was a husband or no husband, was no business of hers; her
business was to assist me in my present circumstances, whether I had a
husband or no.  'For, madam,' says she, 'to have a husband that cannot
appear, is to have no husband in the sense of the case; and, therefore,
whether you are a wife or a mistress is all one to me.'

I found presently, that whether I was a whore or a wife, I was to pass
for a whore here, so I let that go.  I told her it was true, as she
said, but that, however, if I must tell her my case, I must tell it her
as it was; so I related it to her as short as I could, and I concluded
it to her thus.  'I trouble you with all this, madam,' said I, 'not
that, as you said before, it is much to the purpose in your affair, but
this is to the purpose, namely, that I am not in any pain about being
seen, or being public or concealed, for 'tis perfectly indifferent to
me; but my difficulty is, that I have no acquaintance in this part of
the nation.'

'I understand you, madam' says she; 'you have no security to bring to
prevent the parish impertinences usual in such cases, and perhaps,'
says she, 'do not know very well how to dispose of the child when it
comes.'  'The last,' says I, 'is not so much my concern as the first.'
'Well, madam,' answered the midwife, 'dare you put yourself into my
hands?  I live in such a place; though I do not inquire after you, you
may inquire after me.  My name is B----; I live in such a
street'--naming the street--'at the sign of the Cradle.  My profession
is a midwife, and I have many ladies that come to my house to lie in.
I have given security to the parish in general terms to secure them
from any charge from whatsoever shall come into the world under my
roof.  I have but one question to ask in the whole affair, madam,' says
she, 'and if that be answered you shall be entirely easy for all the
rest.'

I presently understood what she meant, and told her, 'Madam, I believe
I understand you.  I thank God, though I want friends in this part of
the world, I do not want money, so far as may be necessary, though I do
not abound in that neither':  this I added because I would not make her
expect great things.  'Well, madam,' says she, 'that is the thing
indeed, without which nothing can be done in these cases; and yet,'
says she, 'you shall see that I will not impose upon you, or offer
anything that is unkind to you, and if you desire it, you shall know
everything beforehand, that you may suit yourself to the occasion, and
be neither costly or sparing as you see fit.'

I told her she seemed to be so perfectly sensible of my condition, that
I had nothing to ask of her but this, that as I had told her that I had
money sufficient, but not a great quantity, she would order it so that
I might be at as little superfluous charge as possible.

She replied that she would bring in an account of the expenses of it in
two or three shapes, and like a bill of fare, I should choose as I
pleased; and I desired her to do so.

The next day she brought it, and the copy of her three bills was as
follows:--


1.  For three months' lodging in her house, including
    my diet, at 10s. a week . . . . . . . . . . . 6#,  0s., 0d.

2.  For a nurse for the month, and use of childbed
    linen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1#, 10s., 0d.

3.  For a minister to christen the child, and to the
    godfathers and clerk  . . . . . . . . . . . . 1#, 10s., 0d.

4.  For a supper at the christening if I had five friends
    at it . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1#,  0s., 0d.

    For her fees as a midwife, and the taking off the
    trouble of the parish . . . . . . . . . . . . 3#,  3s., 0d.

    To her maid servant attending . . . . . . . . 0#, 10s., 0d.
                                                 --------------
                                                 13#, 13s., 0d.


This was the first bill; the second was the same terms:--

1.  For three months' lodging and diet, etc., at 20s.
    per week . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13#,  0s., 0d.

2.  For a nurse for the month, and the use of linen
    and lace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2#, 10s., 0d.

3.  For the minister to christen the child, etc., as
    above . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2#,  0s., 0d.

4.  For supper and for sweetmeats
    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3#,  3s., 0d.

    For her fees as above . . . . . . . . . . . . 5#,  5s., 0d.

    For a servant-maid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1#,  0s., 0d.
                                                 --------------
                                                 26#, 18s., 0d.


This was the second-rate bill; the third, she said, was for a degree
higher, and when the father or friends appeared:--

1.  For three months' lodging and diet, having two
    rooms and a garret for a servant . . . . . . 30#,  0s., 0d.,

2.  For a nurse for the month, and the finest suit
    of childbed linen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4#,  4s., 0d.

3.  For the minister to christen the child, etc.  2#, 10s., 0d.

4.  For a supper, the gentlemen to send in the
    wine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6#,  0s., 0d.

    For my fees, etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10#, 10s., 0d.

    The maid, besides their own maid, only
    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0#, 10s., 0d.
                                                 --------------
                                                 53#, 14s., 0d.


I looked upon all three bills, and smiled, and told her I did not see
but that she was very reasonable in her demands, all things considered,
and for that I did not doubt but her accommodations were good.

She told me I should be judge of that when I saw them.  I told her I
was sorry to tell her that I feared I must be her lowest-rated
customer.  'And perhaps, madam,' said I, 'you will make me the less
welcome upon that account.'  'No, not at all,' said she; 'for where I
have one of the third sort I have two of the second, and four to one of
the first, and I get as much by them in proportion as by any; but if
you doubt my care of you, I will allow any friend you have to overlook
and see if you are well waited on or no.'

Then she explained the particulars of her bill.  'In the first place,
madam,' said she, 'I would have you observe that here is three months'
keeping; you are but ten shillings a week; I undertake to say you will
not complain of my table.  I suppose,' says she, 'you do not live
cheaper where you are now?'  'No, indeed,' said I, 'not so cheap, for I
give six shillings per week for my chamber, and find my own diet as
well as I can, which costs me a great deal more.'

'Then, madam,' says she, 'if the child should not live, or should be
dead-born, as you know sometimes happens, then there is the minister's
article saved; and if you have no friends to come to you, you may save
the expense of a supper; so that take those articles out, madam,' says
she, 'your lying in will not cost you above #5, 3s. in all more than
your ordinary charge of  living.'

This was the most reasonable thing that I ever heard of; so I smiled,
and told her I would come and be her customer; but I told her also,
that as I had two months and more to do, I might perhaps be obliged to
stay longer with her than three months, and desired to know if she
would not be obliged to remove me before it was proper.  No, she said;
her house was large, and besides, she never put anybody to remove, that
had lain in, till they were willing to go; and if she had more ladies
offered, she was not so ill-beloved among her neighbours but she could
provide accommodations for twenty, if there was occasion.

I found she was an eminent lady in her way; and, in short, I agreed to
put myself into her hands, and promised her.  She then talked of other
things, looked about into my accommodations where I was, found fault
with my wanting attendance and conveniences, and that I should not be
used so at her house.  I told her I was shy of speaking, for the woman
of the house looked stranger, or at least I thought so, since I had
been ill, because I was with child; and I was afraid she would put some
affront or other upon me, supposing that I had been able to give but a
slight account of myself.

'Oh dear,' said she, 'her ladyship is no stranger to these things; she
has tried to entertain ladies in your condition several times, but she
could not secure the parish; and besides, she is not such a nice lady
as you take her to be; however, since you are a-going, you shall not
meddle with her, but I'll see you are a little better looked after
while you are here than I think you are, and it shall not cost you the
more neither.'

I did not understand her at all; however, I thanked her, and  so we
parted.  The next morning she sent me a chicken roasted and hot, and a
pint bottle of sherry, and ordered the maid to tell me that she was to
wait on me every day as long as I stayed there.

This was surprisingly good and kind, and I accepted it very willingly.
At night she sent to me again, to know if I wanted anything, and how I
did, and to order the maid to come to her in the morning with my
dinner.  The maid  had orders to make me some chocolate in the morning
before she came away, and did so, and at noon she brought me the
sweetbread of a breast of veal, whole, and a dish of soup for my
dinner; and after this manner she nursed me up at a distance, so that I
was mightily well pleased, and quickly well, for indeed my dejections
before were the principal part of my illness.

I expected, as is usually the case among such people, that the servant
she sent me would have been some imprudent brazen wench of Drury Lane
breeding, and I was very uneasy at having her with me upon that
account; so I would not let her lie in that house the first night by
any means, but had my eyes about me as narrowly as if she had been a
public thief.

My gentlewoman guessed presently what was the matter, and sent her back
with a short note, that I might depend upon the honesty of her maid;
that she would be answerable for her upon all accounts; and that she
took no servants into her house without very good security for their
fidelity.  I was then perfectly easy; and indeed the maid's behaviour
spoke for itself, for a modester, quieter, soberer girl never came into
anybody's family, and I found her so afterwards.

As soon as I was well enough to go abroad, I went with the maid to see
the house, and to see the apartment I was to have; and everything was
so handsome and so clean and well, that, in short, I had nothing to
say, but was wonderfully pleased and satisfied with what I had met
with, which, considering the melancholy circumstances I was in, was far
beyond what I looked for.

It might be expected that I should give some account of the nature of
the wicked practices of this woman, in whose hands I was now fallen;
but it would be too much encouragement to the vice, to let the world
see what easy measures were here taken to rid the women's unwelcome
burthen of a child clandestinely gotten.  This grave matron had several
sorts of practice, and this was one particular, that if a child was
born, though not in her house (for she had occasion to be called to
many private labours), she had people at hand, who for a piece of money
would take the child off their hands, and off from the hands of the
parish too; and those children, as she said, were honestly provided for
and taken care of.  What should become of them all, considering so
many, as by her account she was concerned with, I cannot conceive.

I had many times discourses upon that subject with her; but she was
full of this argument, that she save the life of many an innocent lamb,
as she called them, which would otherwise perhaps have been murdered;
and of many women who, made desperate by the misfortune, would
otherwise be tempted to destroy their children, and bring themselves to
the gallows.  I granted her that this was true, and a very commendable
thing, provided the poor children fell into good hands afterwards, and
were not abused, starved, and neglected by the nurses that bred them
up.  She answered, that she always took care of that, and had no nurses
in her business but what were very good, honest people, and such as
might be depended upon.

I could say nothing to the contrary, and so was obliged to say, 'Madam,
I do not question you do your part honestly, but what those people do
afterwards is the main question'; and she stopped my mouth again with
saying that she took the utmost care about it.

The only thing I found in all her conversation on these subjects that
gave me any distaste, was, that one time in discouraging about my being
far gone with child, and the time I expected to come, she said
something that looked as if she could help me off with my burthen
sooner, if I was willing; or, in English, that she could give me
something to make me miscarry, if I had a desire to put an end to my
troubles that way; but I soon let her see that I abhorred the thoughts
of it; and, to do her justice, she put it off so cleverly, that I could
not say she really intended it, or whether she only mentioned the
practice as a horrible thing; for she couched her words so well, and
took my meaning so quickly, that she gave her negative before I could
explain myself.

To bring this part into as narrow a compass as possible, I quitted my
lodging at St. Jones's and went to my new governess, for so they called
her in the house, and there I was indeed treated with so much courtesy,
so carefully looked to, so handsomely provided, and everything so well,
that I was surprised at it, and could not at first see what advantage
my governess made of it; but I found afterwards that she professed to
make no profit of lodgers' diet, nor indeed could she get much by it,
but that her profit lay in the other articles of her management, and
she made enough that way, I assure you; for 'tis scarce credible what
practice she had, as well abroad as at home, and yet all upon the
private account, or, in plain English, the whoring account.

While I was in her house, which was near four months, she had no less
than twelve ladies of pleasure brought to bed within the doors, and I
think she had two-and-thirty, or thereabouts, under her conduct without
doors, whereof one, as nice as she was with me, was lodged with my old
landlady at St. Jones's.

This was a strange testimony of the growing vice of the age, and such a
one, that as bad as I had been myself, it shocked my very senses.  I
began to nauseate the place I was in and, about all, the wicked
practice; and yet I must say that I never saw, or do I believe there
was to be seen, the least indecency in the house the whole time I was
there.

Not a man was ever seen to come upstairs, except to visit the lying-in
ladies within their month, nor then without the old lady with them, who
made it a piece of honour of her management that no man should touch a
woman, no, not his own wife, within the month; nor would she permit any
man to lie in the house upon any pretence whatever, no, not though she
was sure it was with his own wife; and her general saying for it was,
that she cared not how many children were born in her house, but she
would have none got there if she could help it.

It might perhaps be carried further than was needful, but it was an
error of the right hand if it was an error, for by this she kept up the
reputation, such as it was, of her business, and obtained this
character, that though she did take care of the women when they were
debauched, yet she was not instrumental to their being debauched at
all; and yet it was a wicked trade she drove too.

While I was there, and before I was brought to bed, I received a letter
from my trustee at the bank, full of kind, obliging things, and
earnestly pressing me to return to London.  It was near a fortnight old
when it came to me, because it had been first sent into Lancashire, and
then returned to me.  He concludes with telling me that he had obtained
a decree, I think he called it, against his wife, and that he would be
ready to make good his engagement to me, if I would accept of him,
adding a great many protestations of kindness and affection, such as he
would have been far from offering if he had known the circumstances I
had been in, and which as it was I had been very far from deserving.

I returned an answer to his letter, and dated it at Liverpool, but sent
it by messenger, alleging that it came in cover to a friend in town.  I
gave him joy of his deliverance, but raised some scruples at the
lawfulness of his marrying again, and told him I supposed he would
consider very seriously upon that point before he resolved on it, the
consequence being too great for a man of his judgment to venture rashly
upon a thing of that nature; so concluded, wishing him very well in
whatever he resolved, without letting him into anything of my own mind,
or giving any answer to his proposal of my coming to London to him, but
mentioned at a distance my intention to return the latter end of the
year, this being dated in April.

I was brought to bed about the middle of May and had another brave boy,
and myself in as good condition as usual on such occasions.  My
governess did her part as a midwife with the greatest art and dexterity
imaginable, and far beyond all that ever I had had any experience of
before.

Her care of me in my travail, and after in my lying in, was such, that
if she had been my own mother it could not have been better.  Let none
be encouraged in their loose practices from this dexterous lady's
management, for she is gone to her place, and I dare say has left
nothing behind her that can or will come up on it.

I think I had been brought to bed about twenty-two days when I received
another letter from my friend at the bank, with the surprising news
that he had obtained a final sentence of divorce against his wife, and
had served her with it on such a day, and that he had such an answer to
give to all my scruples about his marrying again, as I could not
expect, and as he had no desire of; for that his wife, who had been
under some remorse before for her usage of him, as soon as she had the
account that he had gained his point, had very unhappily destroyed
herself that same evening.

He expressed himself very handsomely as to his being concerned at her
disaster, but cleared himself of having any hand in it, and that he had
only done himself justice in a case in which he was notoriously injured
and abused.  However, he said that he was extremely afflicted at it,
and had no view of any satisfaction left in his world, but only in the
hope that I would come and relieve him by my company; and then he
pressed me violently indeed to give him some hopes that I would at
least come up to town and let him see me, when he would further enter
into discourse about it.

I was exceedingly surprised at the news, and began now seriously to
reflect on my present circumstances, and the inexpressible misfortune
it was to me to have a child upon my hands, and what to do in it I knew
not.  At last I opened my case at a distance to my governess.  I
appeared melancholy and uneasy for several days, and she lay at me
continually to know what trouble me.  I could not for my life tell her
that I had an offer of marriage, after I had so often told her that I
had a husband, so that I really knew not what to say to her.  I owned I
had something which very much troubled me, but at the same time told
her I could not speak of it to any one alive.

She continued importuning me several days, but it was impossible, I
told her, for me to commit the secret to anybody.  This, instead of
being an answer to her, increased her importunities; she urged her
having been trusted with the greatest secrets of this nature, that it
was her business to conceal everything, and that to discover things of
that nature would be her ruin.  She asked me if ever I had found her
tattling to me of other people's affairs, and how could I suspect her?
She told me, to unfold myself to her was telling it to nobody; that she
was silent as death; that it must be a very strange case indeed that
she could not help me out of; but to conceal it was to deprive myself
of all possible help, or means of help, and to deprive her of the
opportunity of serving me.  In short, she had such a bewitching
eloquence, and so great a power of persuasion that there was no
concealing anything from her.

So I resolved to unbosom myself to her.  I told her the history of my
Lancashire marriage, and how both of us had been disappointed; how we
came together, and how we parted; how he absolutely discharged me, as
far as lay in him, free liberty to marry again, protesting that if he
knew it he would never claim me, or disturb or expose me; that I
thought I was free, but was dreadfully afraid to venture, for fear of
the consequences that might follow in case of a discovery.

Then I told her what a good offer I had; showed her my friend's two
last letters, inviting me to come to London, and let her see with what
affection and earnestness they were written, but blotted out the name,
and also the story about the disaster of his wife, only that she was
dead.

She fell a-laughing at my scruples about marrying, and told me the
other was no marriage, but a cheat on both sides; and that, as we were
parted by mutual consent, the nature of the contract was destroyed, and
the obligation was mutually discharged.  She had arguments for this at
the tip of her tongue; and, in short, reasoned me out of my reason; not
but that it was too by the help of my own inclination.

But then came the great and main difficulty, and that was the child;
this, she told me in so many words, must be removed, and that so as
that it should never be possible for any one to discover it.  I knew
there was no marrying without entirely concealing that I had had a
child, for he would soon have discovered by the age of it that it was
born, nay, and gotten too, since my parley with him, and that would
have destroyed all the affair.

But it touched my heart so forcibly to think of parting entirely with
the child, and, for aught I knew, of having it murdered, or starved by
neglect and ill-usage (which was much the same), that I could not think
of it without horror.  I wish all those women who consent to the
disposing their children out of the way, as it is called, for decency
sake, would consider that 'tis only a contrived method for murder; that
is to say, a-killing their children with safety.

It is manifest to all that understand anything of children, that we are
born into the world helpless, and incapable either to supply our own
wants or so much as make them known; and that without help we must
perish; and this help requires not only an assisting hand, whether of
the mother or somebody else, but there are two things necessary in that
assisting  hand, that is, care and skill; without both which, half the
children that are born would die, nay, though they were not to be
denied food; and one half more of those that remained would be cripples
or fools, lose their limbs, and perhaps their sense.  I question not
but that these are partly the reasons why affection was placed by
nature in the hearts of mothers to their children; without which they
would never be able to give themselves up, as 'tis necessary they
should, to the care and waking pains needful to the support of their
children.

Since this care is needful to the life of children, to neglect them is
to murder them; again, to give them up to be managed by those people
who have none of that needful affection placed by nature in them, is to
neglect them in the highest degree; nay, in some it goes farther, and
is a neglect in order to their being lost; so that 'tis even an
intentional murder, whether the child lives or dies.

All those things represented themselves to my view, and that is the
blackest and most frightful form:  and as I was very free with my
governess, whom I had now learned to call mother, I represented to her
all the dark thoughts which I had upon me about it, and told her what
distress I was in.  She seemed graver by much at this part than at the
other; but as she was hardened in these things beyond all possibility
of being touched with the religious part, and the scruples about the
murder, so she was equally impenetrable in that part which related to
affection.  She asked me if she had not been careful and tender to me
in my lying in, as if I had been her own child.  I told her I owned she
had.  'Well, my dear,' says she, 'and when you are gone, what are you
to me?  And what would it be to me if you were to be hanged?  Do you
think there are not women who, as it is their trade and they get their
bread by it, value themselves upon their being as careful of children
as their own mothers can be, and understand it rather better?  Yes,
yes, child,' says she, 'fear it not; how were we nursed ourselves?  Are
you sure you was nursed up by your own mother? and yet you look fat and
fair, child,' says the old beldam; and with that she stroked me over
the face.  'Never be concerned, child,' says she, going on in her
drolling way; 'I have no murderers about me; I employ the best and the
honestest nurses that can be had, and have as few children miscarry
under their hands as there would if they were all nursed by mothers; we
want neither care nor skill.'

She touched me to the quick when she asked if I was sure that I was
nursed by my own mother; on the contrary I was sure I was not; and I
trembled, and looked pale at the very expression.  'Sure,' said I to
myself, 'this creature cannot be a witch, or have any conversation with
a spirit, that can inform her what was done with me before I was able
to know it myself'; and I looked at her as if I had been frightened;
but reflecting that it could not be possible for her to know anything
about me, that disorder went off, and I began to be easy, but it was
not presently.

She perceived the disorder I was in, but did not know the meaning of
it; so she ran on in her wild talk upon the weakness of my supposing
that children were murdered because they were not all nursed by the
mother, and to persuade me that the children she disposed of were as
well used as if the mothers had the nursing of them themselves.

'It may be true, mother,' says I, 'for aught I know, but my doubts are
very strongly grounded indeed.'  'Come, then,' says she, 'let's hear
some of them.'  'Why, first,' says I, 'you give a piece of money to
these people to take the child off the parent's hands, and to take care
of it as long as it lives.  Now we know, mother,' said I, 'that those
are poor people, and their gain consists in being quit of the charge as
soon as they can; how can I doubt but that, as it is best for them to
have the child die, they are not over solicitous about life?'

'This is all vapours and fancy,' says the old woman; 'I tell you their
credit depends upon the child's life, and they are as careful as any
mother of you all.'

'O mother,' says I, 'if I was but sure my little baby would be
carefully looked to, and have justice done it, I should be happy
indeed; but it is impossible I can be satisfied in that point unless I
saw it, and to see it would be ruin and destruction to me, as now my
case stands; so what to do I know not.'

'A fine story!' says the governess.  'You would see the child, and you
would not see the child; you would be concealed and discovered both
together.  These are things impossible, my dear; so you must e'en do as
other conscientious mothers have done before you, and be contented with
things as they must be, though they are not as you wish them to be.'

I understood what she meant by conscientious mothers; she would have
said conscientious whores, but she was not willing to disoblige me, for
really in this case I was not a whore, because legally married, the
force of former marriage excepted.

However, let me be what I would, I was not come up to that pitch of
hardness common to the profession; I mean, to be unnatural, and
regardless of the safety of my child; and I preserved this honest
affection so long, that I was upon the point of giving up my friend at
the bank, who lay so hard at me to come to him and marry him, that, in
short, there was hardly any room to deny him.

At last my old governess came to me, with her usual assurance.  'Come,
my dear,' says she, 'I have found out a way how you shall be at a
certainty that your child shall be used well, and yet the people that
take care of it shall never know you, or who the mother of the child
is.'

'Oh mother,' says I, 'if you can do so, you will engage me to you for
ever.'  'Well,' says she, 'are you willing to be a some small annual
expense, more than what we usually give to the people we contract
with?'  'Ay,' says I, 'with all my heart, provided I may be concealed.'
'As to that,' says the governess, 'you shall be secure, for the nurse
shall never so much as dare to inquire about you, and you shall once or
twice a year go with me and see your child, and see how 'tis used, and
be satisfied that it is in good hands, nobody knowing who you are.'

'Why,' said I, 'do you think, mother, that when I come to see my child,
I shall be able to conceal my being the mother of it?  Do you think
that possible?'

'Well, well,' says my governess, 'if you discover it, the nurse shall
be never the wiser; for she shall be forbid to ask any questions about
you, or to take any notice.  If she offers it, she shall lose the money
which you are suppose to give her, and the child shall be taken from
her too.'

I was very well pleased with this.  So the next week a countrywoman was
brought from Hertford, or thereabouts, who was to take the child off
our hands entirely for #10 in money.  But if I would allow #5 a year
more of her, she would be obliged to bring the child to my governess's
house as often as we desired, or we should come down and look at it,
and see how well she used it.

The woman was very wholesome-looking, a likely woman, a cottager's
wife, but she had very good clothes and linen, and everything well
about her; and with a heavy heart and many a tear, I let her have my
child.  I had been down at Hertford, and looked at her and at her
dwelling, which I liked well enough; and I promised her great things if
she would be kind to the child, so she knew at first word that I was
the child's mother.  But she seemed to be so much out of the way, and
to have no room to inquire after me, that I thought I was safe enough.
So, in short, I consented to let her have the child, and I gave her
#10; that is to say, I gave it to my governess, who gave it the poor
woman before my face, she agreeing never to return the child back to
me, or to claim anything more for its keeping or bringing up; only that
I promised, if she took a great deal of care of it, I would give her
something more as often as I came to see it; so that I was not bound to
pay the #5, only that I promised my governess I would do it.  And thus
my great care was over, after a manner, which though it did not at all
satisfy my mind, yet was the most convenient for me, as my affairs then
stood, of any that could be thought of at that time.

I then began to write to my friend at the bank in a more kindly style,
and particularly about the beginning of July I sent him a letter, that
I proposed to be in town some time in August.  He returned me an answer
in the most passionate terms imaginable, and desired me to let him have
timely notice, and he would come and meet me, two day's journey.  This
puzzled me scurvily, and I did not know what answer to make of it.
Once I resolved to take the stage-coach to West Chester, on purpose
only to have the satisfaction of coming back, that he might see me
really come in the same coach; for I had a jealous thought, though I
had no ground for it at all, lest he should think I was not really in
the country.  And it was no ill-grounded thought as you shall hear
presently.

I endeavoured to reason myself out of it, but it was in vain; the
impression lay so strong on my mind, that it was not to be resisted.
At last it came as an addition to my new design of going into the
country, that it would be an excellent blind to my old governess, and
would cover entirely all my other affairs, for she did not know in the
least whether my new lover lived in London or in Lancashire; and when I
told her my resolution, she was fully persuaded it was in Lancashire.

Having taken my measure for this journey I let her know it, and sent
the maid that tended me, from the beginning, to take a place for me in
the coach.  She would have had me let the maid have waited on me down
to the last stage, and come up again in the waggon, but I convinced her
it would not be convenient.  When I went away, she told me she would
enter into no measures for correspondence, for she saw evidently that
my affection to my child would cause me to write to her, and to visit
her too when I came to town again.  I assured her it would, and so took
my leave, well satisfied to have been freed from such a house, however
good my accommodations there had been, as I have related above.

I took the place in the coach not to its full extent, but to a place
called Stone, in Cheshire, I think it is, where I not only had no
manner of business, but not so much as the least acquaintance with any
person in the town or near it.  But I knew that with money in the
pocket one is at home anywhere; so I lodged there two or three days,
till, watching my opportunity, I found room in another stage-coach, and
took passage back again for London, sending a letter to my gentleman
that I should be such a certain day at Stony-Stratford, where the
coachman told me he was to lodge.

It happened to be a chance coach that I had taken up, which, having
been hired on purpose to carry some gentlemen to West Chester who were
going for Ireland, was now returning, and did not tie itself to exact
times or places as the stages did; so that, having been obliged to lie
still on Sunday, he had time to get himself ready to come out, which
otherwise he could not have done.

However, his warning was so short, that he could not reach to
Stony-Stratford time enough to be with me at night, but he met me at a
place called Brickhill the next morning, as we were just coming in to
tow.

I confess I was very glad to see him, for I had thought myself a little
disappointed over-night, seeing I had gone so far to contrive my coming
on purpose.  He pleased me doubly too by the figure he came in, for he
brought a very handsome (gentleman's) coach and four horses, with a
servant to attend him.

He took me out of the stage-coach immediately, which stopped at an inn
in Brickhill; and putting into the same inn, he set up his own coach,
and bespoke his dinner.  I asked him what he meant by that, for I was
for going forward with the journey.  He said, No, I had need of a
little rest upon the road, and that was a very good sort of a house,
though it was but a little town; so we would go no farther that night,
whatever came of it.

I did not press him much, for since he had come so to meet me, and put
himself to so much expense, it was but reasonable I should oblige him a
little too; so I was easy as to that point.

After dinner we walked to see the town, to see the church, and to view
the fields, and the country, as is usual for strangers to do; and our
landlord was our guide in going to see the church. I observed my
gentleman inquired pretty much about the parson, and I took the hint
immediately that he certainly would propose to be married; and though
it was a sudden thought, it followed presently, that, in short, I would
not refuse him; for, to be plain, with my circumstances I was in no
condition now to say No; I had no reason now to run any more such
hazards.

But while these thoughts ran round in my head, which was the work but
of a few moments, I observed my landlord took him aside and whispered
to him, though not very softly neither, for so much I overheard:  'Sir,
if you shall have occasion----' the rest I could not hear, but it seems
it was to this purpose:  'Sir, if you shall have occasion for a
minister, I have a friend a little way off that will serve you, and be
as private as you please.' My gentleman answered loud enough for me to
hear, 'Very well, I believe I shall.'

I was no sooner come back to the inn but he fell upon me with
irresistible words, that since he had had the good fortune to meet me,
and everything concurred, it would be hastening his felicity if I would
put an end to the matter just there.  'What do you mean?' says I,
colouring a little.  'What, in an inn, and upon the road!  Bless us
all,' said I, as if I had been surprised, 'how can you talk so?'  'Oh,
I can talk so very well,' says he, 'I came a-purpose to talk so, and
I'll show you that I did'; and with that he pulls out a great bundle of
papers.  'You fright me,' said I; 'what are all these?'  'Don't be
frighted, my dear,' said he, and kissed me.  This was the first time
that he had been so free to call me 'my dear'; then he repeated it,
'Don't be frighted; you shall see what it is all'; then he laid them
all abroad.  There was first the deed or sentence of divorce from his
wife, and the full evidence of her playing the whore; then there were
the certificates of the minister and churchwardens of the parish where
she lived, proving that she was buried, and intimating the manner of
her death; the copy of the coroner's warrant for a jury to sit upon
her, and the verdict of the jury, who brought it in Non compos mentis.
All this was indeed to the purpose, and to give me satisfaction,
though, by the way, I was not so scrupulous, had he known all, but that
I might have taken him without it.  However, I looked them all over as
well as I could, and told him that this was all very clear indeed, but
that he need not have given himself the trouble to have brought them
out with him, for it was time enough.  Well, he said, it might be time
enough for me, but no time but the present time was time enough for him.

There were other papers rolled up, and I asked him what they were.
'Why, ay,' says he, 'that's the question I wanted to have you ask me';
so he unrolls them and takes out a little shagreen case, and gives me
out of it a very fine diamond ring.  I could not refuse it, if I had a
mind to do so, for he put it upon my finger; so I made him a curtsy and
accepted it.  Then he takes out another ring:  'And this,' says he, 'is
for another occasion,' so he puts that in his pocket.  'Well, but let
me see it, though,' says I, and smiled; 'I guess what it is; I think
you are mad.' 'I should have been mad if I had done less,' says he, and
still he did not show me, and I had a great mind to see it; so I says,
'Well, but let me see it.'  'Hold,' says he, 'first look here'; then he
took up the roll again and read it, and behold! it was a licence for us
to be married.  'Why,' says I, 'are you distracted?  Why, you were
fully satisfied that I would comply and yield at first word, or
resolved to take no denial.'  'The last is certainly the case,' said
he.  'But you may be mistaken,' said I.  'No, no,' says he, 'how can
you think so?  I must not be denied, I can't be denied'; and with that
he fell to kissing me so violently, I could not get rid of him.

There was a bed in the room, and we were walking to and again, eager in
the discourse; at last he takes me by surprise in his arms, and threw
me on the bed and himself with me, and holding me fast in his arms, but
without the least offer of any indecency, courted me to consent with
such repeated entreaties and arguments, protesting his affection, and
vowing he would not let me go till I had promised him, that at last I
said, 'Why, you resolve not to be denied, indeed, I can't be denied.'
'Well, well,' said I, and giving him a slight kiss, 'then you shan't be
denied,' said I; 'let me get up.'

He was so transported with my consent, and the kind manner of it, that
I began to think once he took it for a marriage, and would not stay for
the form; but I wronged him, for he gave over kissing me, and then
giving me two or three kisses again, thanked me for my kind yielding to
him; and was so overcome with the satisfaction and joy of it, that I
saw tears stand in his eyes.

I turned from him, for it filled my eyes with tears too, and I asked
him leave to retire a little to my chamber.  If ever I had a grain of
true repentance for a vicious and abominable life for twenty-four years
past, it was then.  On, what a felicity is it to mankind, said I to
myself, that they cannot see into the hearts of one another!  How happy
had it been for me if I had been wife to a man of so much honesty, and
so much affection from the beginning!

Then it occurred to me, 'What an abominable creature am I!  and how is
this innocent gentleman going to be abused by me!  How little does he
think, that having divorced a whore, he is throwing himself into the
arms of another! that he is going to marry one that has lain with two
brothers, and has had three children by her own brother! one that was
born in Newgate, whose mother was a whore, and is now a transported
thief!  one that has lain with thirteen men, and has had a child since
he saw me!  Poor gentleman!' said I, 'what is he going to do?' After
this reproaching myself was over, it following thus: 'Well, if I must
be his wife, if it please God to give me grace, I'll be a true wife to
him, and love him suitably to the strange excess of his passion for me;
I will make him amends if possible, by what he shall see, for the
cheats and abuses I put upon him, which he does not see.'

He was impatient for my coming out of my chamber, but finding me long,
he went downstairs and talked with my landlord about the parson.

My landlord, an officious though well-meaning fellow, had sent away for
the neighbouring clergyman; and when my gentleman began to speak of it
to him, and talk of sending for him, 'Sir,' says he to him, 'my friend
is in the house'; so without any more words he brought them together.
When he came to the minister, he asked him if he would venture to marry
a couple of strangers that were both willing.  The parson said that Mr.
---- had said something to him of it; that he hoped it was no
clandestine business; that he seemed to be a grave gentleman, and he
supposed madam was not a girl, so that the consent of friends should be
wanted.  'To put you out of doubt of that,' says my gentleman, 'read
this paper'; and out he pulls the license.  'I am satisfied,' says the
minister; 'where is the lady?'  'You shall see her presently,' says my
gentleman.

When he had said thus he comes upstairs, and I was by that time come
out of my room; so he tells me the minister was below, and that he had
talked with him, and that upon showing him the license, he was free to
marry us with all his heart, 'but he asks to see you'; so he asked if I
would let him come up.

''Tis time enough,' said I, 'in the morning, is it not?'  'Why,' said
he, 'my dear, he seemed to scruple whether it was not some young girl
stolen from her parents, and I assured him we were both of age to
command our own consent; and that made him ask to see you.'  'Well,'
said I, 'do as you please'; so up they brings the parson, and a merry,
good sort of gentleman he was.  He had been told, it seems, that we had
met there by accident, that I came in the Chester coach, and my
gentleman in his own coach to meet me; that we were to have met last
night at Stony-Stratford, but that he could not reach so far.  'Well,
sir,' says the parson, 'every ill turn has some good in it.  The
disappointment, sir,' says he to my gentleman, 'was yours, and the good
turn is mine, for if you had met at Stony-Stratford I had not had the
honour to marry you.  Landlord, have you a Common Prayer Book?'

I started as if I had been frightened.  'Lord, sir,' says I, 'what do
you mean?  What, to marry in an inn, and at night too?' 'Madam,' says
the minister, 'if you will have it be in the church, you shall; but I
assure you your marriage will be as firm here as in the church; we are
not tied by the canons to marry nowhere but in the church; and if you
will have it in the church, it will be a public as a county fair; and
as for the time of day, it does not at all weigh in this case; our
princes are married in their chambers, and at eight or ten o'clock at
night.'

I was a great while before I could be persuaded, and pretended not to
be willing at all to be married but in the church.  But it was all
grimace; so I seemed at last to be prevailed on, and my landlord and
his wife and daughter were called up.  My landlord was father and clerk
and all together, and we were married, and very merry we were; though I
confess the self-reproaches which I had upon me before lay close to me,
and extorted every now and then a deep sigh from me, which my
bridegroom took notice of, and endeavoured to encourage me, thinking,
poor man, that I had some little hesitations at the step I had taken so
hastily.

We enjoyed ourselves that evening completely, and yet all was kept so
private in the inn that not a servant in the house knew of it, for my
landlady and her daughter waited on me, and would not let any of the
maids come upstairs, except while we were at supper.  My landlady's
daughter I called my bridesmaid; and sending for a shopkeeper the next
morning, I gave the young woman a good suit of knots, as good as the
town would afford, and finding it was a lace-making town, I gave her
mother a piece of bone-lace for a head.

One reason that my landlord was so close was, that he was unwilling the
minister of the parish should hear of it; but for all that somebody
heard of it, so at that we had the bells set a-ringing the next morning
early, and the music, such as the town would afford, under our window;
but my landlord brazened it out, that we were married before we came
thither, only that, being his former guests, we would have our
wedding-supper at his house.

We could not find in our hearts to stir the next day; for, in short,
having been disturbed by the bells in the morning, and having perhaps
not slept overmuch before, we were so sleepy afterwards that we lay in
bed till almost twelve o'clock.

I begged my landlady that we might not have any more music in the town,
nor ringing of bells, and she managed it so well that we were very
quiet; but an odd passage interrupted all my mirth for a good while.
The great room of the house looked into the street, and my new spouse
being belowstairs, I had walked to the end of the room; and it being a
pleasant, warm day, I had opened the window, and was standing at it for
some air, when I saw three gentlemen come by on horseback and go into
an inn just against us.

It was not to be concealed, nor was it so doubtful as to leave me any
room to question it, but the second of the three was my Lancashire
husband.  I was frightened to death; I never was in such a
consternation in my life; I though I should have sunk into the ground;
my blood ran chill in my veins, and I trembled as if I had been in a
cold fit of ague.  I say, there was no room to question the truth of
it; I knew his clothes, I knew his horse, and I knew his face.

The first sensible reflect I made was, that my husband was not by to
see my disorder, and that I was very glad of it.  The gentlemen had not
been long in the house but they came to the window of their room, as is
usual; but my window was shut, you may be sure.  However, I could not
keep from peeping at them, and there I saw him again, heard him call
out to one of the servants of the house for something he wanted, and
received all the terrifying confirmations of its being the same person
that were possible to be had.

My next concern was to know, if possible, what was his business there;
but that was impossible.  Sometimes my imagination formed an idea of
one frightful thing, sometimes of another; sometimes I thought he had
discovered me, and was come to upbraid me with ingratitude and breach
of honour; and every moment I fancied he was coming up the stairs to
insult me; and innumerable fancies came into my head of what was never
in his head, nor ever could be, unless the devil had revealed it to him.

I remained in this fright nearly two hours, and scarce ever kept my eye
from the window or door of the inn where they were.  At last, hearing a
great clatter in the passage of their inn, I ran to the window, and, to
my great satisfaction, saw them all three go out again and travel on
westward.  Had they gone towards London, I should have been still in a
fright, lest I should meet him on the road again, and that he should
know me; but he went the contrary way, and so I was eased of that
disorder.

We resolved to be going the next day, but about six o'clock at night we
were alarmed with a great uproar in the street, and people riding as if
they had been out of their wits; and what was it but a hue-and-cry
after three highwaymen that had robbed two coaches and some other
travellers near Dunstable Hill, and notice had, it seems, been given
that they had been seen at Brickhill at such a house, meaning the house
where those gentlemen had been.

The house was immediately beset and searched, but there were witnesses
enough that the gentlemen had been gone over three hours.  The crowd
having gathered about, we had the news presently; and I was heartily
concerned now another way.  I presently told the people of the house,
that I durst to say those were not the persons, for that I knew one of
the gentlemen to be a very honest person, and of a good estate in
Lancashire.

The constable who came with the hue-and-cry was immediately informed of
this, and came over to me to be satisfied from my own mouth, and I
assured him that I saw the three gentlemen as I was at the window; that
I saw them afterwards at the windows of the room they dined in; that I
saw them afterwards take horse, and I could assure him I knew one of
them to be such a man, that he was a gentleman of a very good estate,
and an undoubted character in Lancashire, from whence I was just now
upon my journey.

The assurance with which I delivered this gave the mob gentry a check,
and gave the constable such satisfaction, that he immediately sounded a
retreat, told his people these were not the men, but that he had an
account they were very honest gentlemen; and so they went all back
again.  What the truth of the matter was I knew not, but certain it was
that the coaches were robbed at Dunstable Hill, and #560 in money
taken; besides, some of the lace merchants that always travel that way
had been visited too.  As to the three gentlemen, that remains to be
explained hereafter.

Well, this alarm stopped us another day, though my spouse was for
travelling, and told me that it was always safest travelling after a
robbery, for that the thieves were sure to be gone far enough off when
they had alarmed the country; but I was afraid and uneasy, and indeed
principally lest my old acquaintance should be upon the road still, and
should chance to see me.

I never lived four pleasanter days together in my life.  I was a mere
bride all this while, and my new spouse strove to make me entirely easy
in everything.  Oh could this state of life have continued, how had all
my past troubles been forgot, and my future sorrows avoided!  But I had
a past life of a most wretched kind to account for, some of it in this
world as well as in another.

We came away the fifth day; and my landlord, because he saw me uneasy,
mounted himself, his son, and three honest country fellows with good
firearms, and, without telling us of it, followed the coach, and would
see us safe into Dunstable.  We could do no less than treat them very
handsomely at Dunstable, which cost my spouse about ten or twelve
shillings, and something he gave the men for their time too, but my
landlord would take nothing for himself.

This was the most happy contrivance for me that could have fallen out;
for had I come to London unmarried, I must either have come to him for
the first night's entertainment, or have discovered to him that I had
not one acquaintance in the whole city of London that could receive a
poor bride for the first night's lodging with her spouse.  But now,
being an old married woman, I made no scruple of going directly home
with him, and there I took possession at once of a house well
furnished, and a husband in very good circumstances, so that I had a
prospect of a very happy life, if I knew how to manage it; and I had
leisure to consider of the real value of the life I was likely to live.
How different it was to be from the loose ungoverned part I had acted
before, and how much happier a life of virtue and sobriety is, than
that which we call a life of pleasure.

Oh had this particular scene of life lasted, or had I learned from that
time I enjoyed it, to have tasted the true sweetness of it, and had I
not fallen into that poverty which is the sure bane of virtue, how
happy had I been, not only here, but perhaps for ever!  for while I
lived thus, I was really a penitent for all my life past.  I looked
back on it with abhorrence, and might truly be said to hate myself for
it.  I often reflected how my lover at the Bath, struck at the hand of
God, repented and abandoned me, and refused to see me any more, though
he loved me to an extreme; but I, prompted by that worst of devils,
poverty, returned to the vile practice, and made the advantage of what
they call a handsome face to be the relief to my necessities, and
beauty be a pimp to vice.

Now I seemed landed in a safe harbour, after the stormy voyage of life
past was at an end, and I began to be thankful for my deliverance.  I
sat many an hour by myself, and wept over the remembrance of past
follies, and the dreadful extravagances of a wicked life, and sometimes
I flattered myself that I had sincerely repented.

But there are temptations which it is not in the power of human nature
to resist, and few know what would be their case if driven to the same
exigencies.  As covetousness is the root of all evil, so poverty is, I
believe, the worst of all snares.  But I waive that discourse till I
come to an experiment.

I lived with this husband with the utmost tranquillity; he was a quiet,
sensible, sober man; virtuous, modest, sincere, and in his business
diligent and just.  His business was in a narrow compass, and his
income sufficient to a plentiful way of living in the ordinary way.  I
do not say to keep an equipage, and make a figure, as the world calls
it, nor did I expect it, or desire it; for as I abhorred the levity and
extravagance of my former life, so I chose now to live retired, frugal,
and within ourselves.  I kept no company, made no visits; minded my
family, and obliged my husband; and this kind of life became a pleasure
to me.

We lived in an uninterrupted course of ease and content for five years,
when a sudden blow from an almost invisible hand blasted all my
happiness, and turned me out into the world in a condition the reverse
of all that had been before it.

My husband having trusted one of his fellow-clerks with a sum of money,
too much for our fortunes to bear the loss of, the clerk failed, and
the loss fell very heavy on my husband, yet it was not so great neither
but that, if he had had spirit and courage to have looked his
misfortunes in the face, his credit was so good that, as I told him, he
would easily recover it; for to sink under trouble is to double the
weight, and he that will die in it, shall die in it.

It was in vain to speak comfortably to him; the wound had sunk too
deep; it was a stab that touched the vitals; he grew melancholy and
disconsolate, and from thence lethargic, and died.  I foresaw the blow,
and was extremely oppressed in my mind, for I saw evidently that if he
died I was undone.

I had had two children by him and no more, for, to tell the truth, it
began to be time for me to leave bearing children, for I was now
eight-and-forty, and I suppose if he had lived I should have had no
more.

I was now left in a dismal and disconsolate case indeed, and in several
things worse than ever.  First, it was past the flourishing time with
me when I might expect to be courted for a mistress; that agreeable
part had declined some time, and the ruins only appeared of what had
been; and that which was worse than all this, that I was the most
dejected, disconsolate creature alive.  I that had encouraged my
husband, and endeavoured to support his spirits under his trouble,
could not support my own; I wanted that spirit in trouble which I told
him was so necessary to him for bearing the burthen.

But my case was indeed deplorable, for I was left perfectly friendless
and helpless, and the loss my husband had sustained had reduced his
circumstances so low, that though indeed I was not in debt, yet I could
easily foresee that what was left would not support me long; that while
it wasted daily for subsistence, I had not way to increase it one
shilling, so that it would be soon all spent, and then I saw nothing
before me but the utmost distress; and this represented itself so
lively to my thoughts, that it seemed as if it was come, before it was
really very near; also my very apprehensions doubled the misery, for I
fancied every sixpence that I paid for a loaf of bread was the last
that I had in the world, and that to-morrow I was to fast, and be
starved to death.

In this distress I had no assistant, no friend to comfort or advise me;
I sat and cried and tormented myself night and day, wringing my hands,
and sometimes raving like a distracted woman; and indeed I have often
wondered it had not affected my reason, for I had the vapours to such a
degree, that my understanding was sometimes quite lost in fancies and
imaginations.

I lived two years in this dismal condition, wasting that little I had,
weeping continually over my dismal circumstances, and, as it were, only
bleeding to death, without the least hope or prospect of help from God
or man; and now I had cried too long, and so often, that tears were, as
I might say, exhausted, and I began to be desperate, for I grew poor
apace.

For a little relief I had put off my house and took lodgings; and as I
was reducing my living, so I sold off most of my goods, which put a
little money in my pocket, and I lived near a year upon that, spending
very sparingly, and eking things out to the utmost; but still when I
looked before me, my very heart would sink within me at the inevitable
approach of misery and want.  Oh let none read this part without
seriously reflecting on the circumstances of a desolate state, and how
they would grapple with mere want of friends and want of bread; it will
certainly make them think not of sparing what they have only, but of
looking up to heaven for support, and of the wise man's prayer, 'Give
me not poverty, lest I steal.'

Let them remember that a time of distress is a time of dreadful
temptation, and all the strength to resist is taken away;  poverty
presses, the soul is made desperate by distress, and what can be done?
It was one evening, when being brought, as I may say, to the last gasp,
I think I may truly say I was distracted and raving, when prompted by I
know not what spirit, and, as it were, doing I did not know what or
why, I dressed me (for I had still pretty good clothes) and went out.
I am very sure I had no manner of design in my head when I went out; I
neither knew nor considered where to go, or on what business; but as
the devil carried me out and laid his bait for me, so he brought me, to
be sure, to the place, for I knew not whither I was going or what I did.

Wandering thus about, I knew not whither, I passed by an apothecary's
shop in Leadenhall Street, when I saw lie on a stool just before the
counter a little bundle wrapped in a white cloth; beyond it stood a
maid-servant with her back to it, looking towards the top of the shop,
where the apothecary's apprentice, as I suppose, was standing upon the
counter, with his back also to the door, and a candle in his hand,
looking and reaching up to the upper shelf for something he wanted, so
that both were engaged mighty earnestly, and nobody else in the shop.

This was the bait; and the devil, who I said laid the snare, as readily
prompted me as if he had spoke, for I remember, and shall never forget
it, 'twas like a voice spoken to me over my shoulder, 'Take the bundle;
be quick; do it this moment.'  It was no sooner said but I stepped into
the shop, and with my back to the wench, as if I had stood up for a
cart that was going by, I put my hand behind me and took the bundle,
and went off with it, the maid or the fellow not perceiving me, or any
one else.

It is impossible to express the horror of my soul all the while I did
it.  When I went away I had no heart to run, or scarce to mend my pace.
I crossed the street indeed, and went down the first turning I came to,
and I think it was a street that went through into Fenchurch Street.
From thence I crossed and turned through so many ways and turnings,
that I could never tell which way it was, not where I went; for I felt
not the ground I stepped on, and the farther I was out of danger, the
faster I went, till, tired and out of breath, I was forced to sit down
on a little bench at a door, and then I began to recover, and found I
was got into Thames Street, near Billingsgate.  I rested me a little
and went on; my blood was all in a fire; my heart beat as if I was in a
sudden fright.  In short, I was under such a surprise that I still knew
not wither I was going, or what to do.

After I had tired myself thus with walking a long way about, and so
eagerly, I began to consider and make home to my lodging, where I came
about nine o'clock at night.

When the bundle was made up for, or on what occasion laid where I found
it, I knew not, but when I came to open it I found there was a suit of
childbed-linen in it, very good and almost new, the lace very fine;
there was a silver porringer of a pint, a small silver mug and six
spoons, with some other linen, a good smock, and three silk
handkerchiefs, and in the mug, wrapped up in a paper, 18s. 6d. in money.

All the while I was opening these things I was under such dreadful
impressions of fear, and I such terror of mind, though I was perfectly
safe, that I cannot express the manner of it.  I sat me down, and cried
most vehemently.  'Lord,' said I, 'what am I now? a thief!  Why, I
shall be taken next time, and be carried to Newgate and be tried for my
life!'  And with that I cried again a long time, and I am sure, as poor
as I was, if I had durst for fear, I would certainly have carried the
things back again; but that went off after a while.  Well, I went to
bed for that night, but slept little; the horror of the fact was upon
my mind, and I knew not what I said or did all night, and all the next
day.  Then I was impatient to hear some news of the loss; and would
fain know how it was, whether they were a poor body's goods, or a rich.
'Perhaps,' said I, 'it may be some poor widow like me, that had packed
up these goods to go and sell them for a little bread for herself and a
poor child, and are now starving and breaking their hearts for want of
that little they would have fetched.'  And this thought tormented me
worse than all the rest, for three or four days' time.

But my own distresses silenced all these reflections, and the prospect
of my own starving, which grew every day more frightful to me, hardened
my heart by degrees.  It was then particularly heavy upon my mind, that
I had been reformed, and had, as I hoped, repented of all my past
wickedness; that I had lived a sober, grave, retired life for several
years, but now I should be driven by the dreadful necessity of my
circumstances to the gates of destruction, soul and body; and two or
three times I fell upon my knees, praying to God, as well as I could,
for deliverance; but I cannot but say, my prayers had no hope in them.
I knew not what to do; it was all fear without, and dark within; and I
reflected on my past life as not sincerely repented of, that Heaven was
now beginning to punish me on this side the grave, and would make me as
miserable as I had been wicked.

Had I gone on here I had perhaps been a true penitent; but I had an
evil counsellor within, and he was continually prompting me to relieve
myself by the worst means; so one evening he tempted me again, by the
same wicked impulse that had said 'Take that bundle,' to go out again
and seek for what might happen.

I went out now by daylight, and wandered about I knew not whither, and
in search of I knew not what, when the devil put a snare in my way of a
dreadful nature indeed, and such a one as I have never had before or
since.  Going through Aldersgate Street, there was a pretty little
child who had been at a dancing-school, and was going home, all alone;
and my prompter, like a true devil, set me upon this innocent creature.
I talked to it, and it prattled to me again, and I took it by the hand
and led it along till I came to a paved alley that goes into
Bartholomew Close, and I led it in there.  The child said that was not
its way home.  I said, 'Yes, my dear, it is; I'll show you the way
home.' The child had a little necklace on of gold beads, and I had my
eye upon that, and in the dark of the alley I stooped, pretending to
mend the child's clog that was loose, and took off her necklace, and
the child never felt it, and so led the child on again.  Here, I say,
the devil put me upon killing the child in the dark alley, that it
might not cry, but the very thought frighted me so that I was ready to
drop down; but I turned the child about and bade it go back again, for
that was not its way home.  The child said, so she would, and I went
through into Bartholomew Close, and then turned round to another
passage that goes into St. John Street; then, crossing into Smithfield,
went down Chick Lane and into Field Lane to Holborn Bridge, when,
mixing with the crowd of people usually passing there, it was not
possible to have been found out; and thus I enterprised my second sally
into the world.

The thoughts of this booty put out all the thoughts of the first, and
the reflections I had made wore quickly off; poverty, as I have said,
hardened my heart, and my own necessities made me regardless of
anything.  The last affair left no great concern upon me, for as I did
the poor child no harm, I only said to myself, I had given the parents
a just reproof for their negligence in leaving the poor little lamb to
come home by itself, and it would teach them to take more care of it
another time.

This string of beads was worth about twelve or fourteen pounds.  I
suppose it might have been formerly the mother's, for it was too big
for the child's wear, but that perhaps the vanity of the mother, to
have her child look fine at the dancing-school, had made her let the
child wear it; and no doubt the child had a maid sent to take care of
it, but she, careless jade, was taken up perhaps with some fellow that
had met her by the way, and so the poor baby wandered till it fell into
my hands.

However, I did the child no harm; I did not so much as fright it, for I
had a great many tender thoughts about me yet, and did nothing but
what, as I may say, mere necessity drove me to.

I had a great many adventures after this, but I was young in the
business, and did not know how to manage, otherwise than as the devil
put things into my head; and indeed he was seldom backward to me.  One
adventure I had which was very lucky to me.  I was going through
Lombard Street in the dusk of the evening, just by the end of Three
King court, when on a sudden comes a fellow running by me as swift as
lightning, and throws a bundle that was in his hand, just behind me, as
I stood up against the corner of the house at the turning into the
alley.  Just as he threw it in he said, 'God bless you, mistress, let
it lie there a little,' and away he runs swift as the wind.  After him
comes two more, and immediately a young fellow without his hat, crying
'Stop thief!' and after him two or three more.  They pursued the two
last fellows so close, that they were forced to drop what they had got,
and one of them was taken into the bargain, and other got off free.

I stood stock-still all this while, till they came back, dragging the
poor fellow they had taken, and lugging the things they had found,
extremely well satisfied that they had recovered the booty and taken
the thief; and thus they passed by me, for I looked only like one who
stood up while the crowd was gone.

Once or twice I asked what was the matter, but the people neglected
answering me, and I was not very importunate; but after the crowd was
wholly past, I took my opportunity to turn about and take up what was
behind me and walk away.  This, indeed, I did with less disturbance
than I had done formerly, for these things I did not steal, but they
were stolen to my hand.  I got safe to my lodgings with this cargo,
which was a piece of fine black lustring silk, and a piece of velvet;
the latter was but part of a piece of about eleven yards; the former
was a whole piece of near fifty yards.  It seems it was a mercer's shop
that they had rifled.  I say rifled, because the goods were so
considerable that they had lost; for the goods that they recovered were
pretty many, and I believe came to about six or seven several pieces of
silk.  How they came to get so many I could not tell; but as I had only
robbed the thief, I made no scruple at taking these goods, and being
very glad of them too.

I had pretty good luck thus far, and I made several adventures more,
though with but small purchase, yet with good success, but I went in
daily dread that some mischief would befall me, and that I should
certainly come to be hanged at last.  The impression this made on me
was too strong to be slighted, and it kept me from making attempts
that, for ought I knew, might have been very safely performed; but one
thing I cannot omit, which was a bait to me many a day.  I walked
frequently out into the villages round the town, to see if nothing
would fall in my way there; and going by a house near Stepney, I saw on
the window-board two rings, one a small diamond ring, and the other a
gold ring, to be sure laid there by some thoughtless lady, that had
more money then forecast, perhaps only till she washed her hands.

I walked several times by the window to observe if I could see whether
there was anybody in the room or no, and I could see nobody, but still
I was not sure.  It came presently into my thoughts to rap at the
glass, as if I wanted to speak with somebody, and if anybody was there
they would be sure to come to the window, and then I would tell them to
remove those rings, for that I had seen two suspicious fellows take
notice of them.  This was a ready thought.  I rapped once or twice and
nobody came, when, seeing the coast clear, I thrust hard against the
square of the glass, and broke it with very little noise, and took  out
the two rings, and walked away with them very safe.  The diamond ring
was worth about #3, and the other about 9s.

I was now at a loss for a market for my goods, and especially for my
two pieces of silk.  I was very loth to dispose of them for a trifle,
as the poor unhappy thieves in general do, who, after they have
ventured their lives for perhaps a thing of value, are fain to sell it
for a song when they have done; but I was resolved I would not do thus,
whatever shift I made, unless I was driven to the last extremity.
However, I did not well know what course to take.  At last I resolved
to go to my old governess, and acquaint myself with her again.  I had
punctually supplied the #5 a year to her for my little boy as long as I
was able, but at last was obliged to put a stop to it.  However, I had
written a letter to her, wherein I had told her that my circumstances
were reduced very low; that I had lost my husband, and that I was not
able to do it any longer, and so begged that the poor child might not
suffer too much for its mother's misfortunes.

I now made her a visit, and I found that she drove something of the old
trade still, but that she was not in such flourishing circumstances as
before; for she had been sued by a certain gentleman who had had his
daughter stolen from him, and who, it seems, she had helped to convey
away; and it was very narrowly that she escaped the gallows.  The
expense also had ravaged her, and she was become very poor; her house
was but meanly furnished, and she was not in such repute for her
practice as before; however, she stood upon her legs, as they say, and
as she was a stirring, bustling woman, and had some stock left, she was
turned pawnbroker, and lived pretty well.

She received me very civilly, and with her usual obliging manner told
me she would not have the less respect for me for my being reduced;
that she had taken care my boy was very well looked after, though I
could not pay for him, and that the woman that had him was easy, so
that I needed not to trouble myself about him till I might be better
able to do it effectually.

I told her that I had not much money left, but that I had some things
that were money's worth, if she could tell me how I might turn them
into money.  She asked me what it was I had.  I pulled out the string
of gold beads, and told her it was one of my husband's presents to me;
then I showed her the two parcels of silk, which I told her I had from
Ireland, and brought up to town with me; and the little diamond ring.
As to the small parcel of plate and spoons, I had found means to
dispose of them myself before; and as for the childbed-linen I had, she
offered me to take it herself, believing it to have been my own.  She
told me that she was turned pawnbroker, and that she would sell those
things for me as pawn to her; and so she sent presently for proper
agents that bought them, being in her hands, without any scruple, and
gave good prices too.

I now began to think this necessary woman might help me a little in my
low condition to some business, for I would gladly have turned my hand
to any honest employment if I could have got it.  But here she was
deficient; honest business did not come within her reach.  If I had
been younger, perhaps she might have helped me to a spark, but my
thoughts were off that kind of livelihood, as being quite out of the
way after fifty, which was my case, and so I told her.

She invited me at last to come, and be at her house till I could find
something to do, and it should cost me very little, and this I gladly
accepted of.  And now living a little easier, I entered into some
measures to have my little son by my last husband taken off; and this
she made easy too, reserving a payment only of #5 a year, if I could
pay it.  This was such a help to me, that for a good while I left off
the wicked trade that I had so newly taken up; and gladly I would have
got my bread by the help of my needle if I could have got work, but
that was very hard to do for one that had no manner of acquaintance in
the world.

However, at last I got some quilting work for ladies' beds, petticoats,
and the like; and this I liked very well, and worked very hard, and
with this I began to live; but the diligent devil, who resolved I
should continue in his service, continually prompted me to go out and
take a walk, that is to say, to see if anything would offer in the old
way.

One evening I blindly obeyed his summons, and fetched a long circuit
through the streets, but met with no purchase, and came home very weary
and empty; but not content with that, I went out the next evening too,
when going by an alehouse I saw the door of a little room open, next
the very street, and on the table a silver tankard, things much in use
in public-houses at that time.  It seems some company had been drinking
there, and the careless boys had forgot to take it away.

I went into the box frankly, and setting the silver tankard on the
corner of the bench, I sat down before it, and knocked with my foot; a
boy came presently, and I bade him fetch me a pint of warm ale, for it
was cold weather; the boy ran, and I heard him go down the cellar to
draw the ale.  While the boy was gone, another boy came into the room,
and cried, 'D' ye call?' I spoke with a melancholy air, and said, 'No,
child; the boy is gone for a pint of ale for me.'

While I sat here, I heard the woman in the bar say, 'Are they all gone
in the five?' which was the box I sat in, and the boy said, 'Yes.' 'Who
fetched the tankard away?' says the woman.  'I did,' says another boy;
'that's it,' pointing, it seems, to another tankard, which he had
fetched from another box by mistake; or else it must be, that the rogue
forgot that he had not brought it in, which certainly he had not.

I heard all this, much to my satisfaction, for I found plainly that the
tankard was not missed, and yet they concluded it was fetched away; so
I drank my ale, called to pay, and as I went away I said, 'Take care of
your plate, child,' meaning a silver pint mug, which he brought me
drink in.  The boy said, 'Yes, madam, very welcome,' and away I came.

I came home to my governess, and now I thought it was a time to try
her, that if I might be put to the necessity of being exposed, she
might offer me some assistance.  When I had been at home some time, and
had an opportunity of talking to her, I told her I had a secret of the
greatest consequence in the world to commit to her, if she had respect
enough for me to keep it a secret.  She told me she had kept one of my
secrets faithfully; why should I doubt her keeping another?  I told her
the strangest thing in the world had befallen me, and that it had made
a thief of me, even without any design, and so told her the whole story
of the tankard.  'And have you brought it away with you, my dear?' says
she.  'To be sure I have,' says I, and showed it her.  'But what shall
I do now,' says I; 'must not carry it again?'

'Carry it again!' says she.  'Ay, if you are minded to be sent to
Newgate for stealing it.'  'Why,' says I, 'they can't be so base to
stop me, when I carry it to them again?'  'You don't know those sort of
people, child,' says she; 'they'll not only carry you to Newgate, but
hang you too, without any regard to the honesty of returning it; or
bring in an account of all the other tankards they have lost, for you
to pay for.'  'What must I do, then?' says I.  'Nay,' says she, 'as you
have played the cunning part and stole it, you must e'en keep it;
there's no going back now.  Besides, child,' says she, 'don't you want
it more than they do?  I wish you could light of such a bargain once a
week.'

This gave me a new notion of my governess, and that since she was
turned pawnbroker, she had a sort of people about her that were none of
the honest ones that I had met with there before.

I had not been long there but I discovered it more plainly than before,
for every now and then I saw hilts of swords, spoons, forks, tankards,
and all such kind of ware brought in, not to be pawned, but to be sold
downright; and she bought everything that came without asking any
questions, but had very good bargains, as I found by her discourse.

I found also that in following this trade she always melted down the
plate she bought, that it might not be challenged; and she came to me
and told me one morning that she was going to melt, and if I would, she
would put my tankard in, that it might not be seen by anybody.  I told
her, with all my heart; so she weighed it, and allowed me the full
value in silver again; but I found she did not do the same to the rest
of her customers.

Some time after this, as I was at work, and very melancholy, she begins
to ask me what the matter was, as she was used to do.  I told her my
heart was heavy; I had little work, and nothing to live on, and knew
not what course to take.  She laughed, and told me I must go out again
and try my fortune; it might be that I might meet with another piece of
plate.  'O mother!' says I, 'that is a trade I have no skill in, and if
I should be taken I am undone at once.'  Says she, 'I could help you to
a schoolmistress that shall make you as dexterous as herself.'  I
trembled at  that proposal, for hitherto I had had no confederates, nor
any acquaintance among that tribe.  But she conquered all my modesty,
and all my fears; and in a little time, by the help of this
confederate, I grew as impudent a thief, and as dexterous as ever Moll
Cutpurse was, though, if fame does not belie her, not half so handsome.

The comrade she helped me to dealt in three sorts of craft, viz.
shoplifting, stealing of shop-books and pocket-books, and taking off
gold watches from the ladies' sides; and this last she did so
dexterously that no woman ever arrived to the performance of that art
so as to do it like her.  I liked the first and the last of these
things very well, and I attended her some time in the practice, just as
a deputy attends a midwife, without any pay.

At length she put me to practice.  She had shown me her art, and I had
several times unhooked a watch from her own side with great dexterity.
At last she showed me a prize, and this was a young lady big with
child, who had a charming watch.  The thing was to be done as she came
out of church.  She goes on one side of the lady, and pretends, just as
she came to the steps, to fall, and fell against the lady with so much
violence as put her into a great fright, and both cried out terribly.
In the very moment that she jostled the lady, I had hold of the watch,
and holding it the right way, the start she gave drew the hook out, and
she never felt it.  I made off immediately, and left my schoolmistress
to come out of her pretended fright gradually, and the lady too; and
presently the watch was missed.  'Ay,' says my comrade, 'then it was
those rogues that thrust me down, I warrant ye; I wonder the
gentlewoman did not miss her watch before, then we might have taken
them.'

She humoured the thing so well that nobody suspected her, and I was got
home a full hour before her.  This was my first adventure in company.
The watch was indeed a very fine one, and had a great many trinkets
about it, and my governess allowed us #20 for it, of which I had half.
And thus I was entered a complete thief, hardened to the pitch above
all the reflections of conscience or modesty, and to a degree which I
must acknowledge I never thought possible in me.

Thus the devil, who began, by the help of an irresistible poverty, to
push me into this wickedness, brought me on to a height beyond the
common rate, even when my necessities were not so great, or the
prospect of my misery so terrifying; for I had now got into a little
vein of work, and as I was not at a loss to handle my needle, it was
very probable, as acquaintance came in, I might have got my bread
honestly enough.

I must say, that if such a prospect of work had presented itself at
first, when I began to feel the approach of my miserable
circumstances--I say, had such a prospect of getting my bread by
working presented itself then, I had never fallen into this wicked
trade, or into such a wicked gang as I was now embarked with; but
practice had hardened me, and I grew audacious to the last degree; and
the more so because I had carried it on so long, and had never been
taken; for, in a word, my new partner in wickedness and I went on
together so long, without being ever detected, that we not only grew
bold, but we grew rich, and we had at one time one-and-twenty gold
watches in our hands.

I remember that one day being a little more serious than ordinary, and
finding I had so good a stock beforehand as I had, for I had near #200
in money for my share, it came strongly into my mind, no doubt from
some kind spirit, if such there be, that at first poverty excited me,
and my distresses drove me to these dreadful shifts; so seeing those
distresses were now relieved, and I could also get something towards a
maintenance by working, and had so good a bank to support me, why
should I now not leave off, as they say, while I was well? that I could
not expect to go always free; and if I was once surprised, and
miscarried, I was undone.

This was doubtless the happy minute, when, if I had hearkened to the
blessed hint, from whatsoever had it came, I had still a cast for an
easy life.  But my fate was otherwise determined; the busy devil that
so industriously drew me in had too fast hold of me to let me go back;
but as poverty brought me into the mire, so avarice kept me in, till
there was no going back.  As to the  arguments which my reason dictated
for persuading me to lay down, avarice stepped in and said, 'Go on, go
on; you have had very good luck; go on till you have gotten four or
five hundred pounds, and then you shall leave off, and then you may
live easy without working at all.'

Thus I, that was once in the devil's clutches, was held fast there as
with a charm, and had no power to go without the circle, till I was
engulfed in labyrinths of trouble too great to get out at all.

However, these thoughts left some impression upon me, and made me act
with some more caution than before, and more than my directors used for
themselves.  My comrade, as I called her, but rather she should have
been called my teacher, with another of her scholars, was the first in
the misfortune; for, happening to be upon the hunt for purchase, they
made an attempt upon a linen-draper in Cheapside, but were snapped by a
hawk's-eyed journeyman, and seized with two pieces of cambric, which
were taken also upon them.

This was enough to lodge them both in Newgate, where they had the
misfortune to have some of their former sins brought to remembrance.
Two other indictments being brought against them, and the facts being
proved upon them, they were both condemned to die.  They both pleaded
their bellies, and were both voted quick with child; though my tutoress
was no more with child than I was.

I went frequently to see them, and condole with them, expecting that it
would be my turn next; but the place gave me so much horror, reflecting
that it was the place of my unhappy birth, and of my mother's
misfortunes, and that I could not bear it, so I was forced to leave off
going to see them.

And oh! could I have but taken warning by their disasters, I had been
happy still, for I was yet free, and had nothing brought against me;
but it could not be, my measure was not yet filled up.

My comrade, having the brand of an old offender, was executed; the
young offender was spared, having obtained a reprieve, but lay starving
a long while in prison, till at last she got her name into what they
call a circuit pardon, and so came off.

This terrible example of my comrade frighted me heartily, and for a
good while I made no excursions; but one night, in the neighbourhood of
my governess's house, they cried 'Fire.' My governess looked out, for
we were all up, and cried immediately that such a gentlewoman's house
was all of a light fire atop, and so indeed it was.  Here she gives me
a job.  'Now, child,' says she, 'there is a rare opportunity, for the
fire being so near that you may go to it before the street is blocked
up with the crowd.'  She presently gave me my cue.  'Go, child,' says
she, 'to the house, and run in and tell the lady, or anybody you see,
that you come to help them, and that you came from such a gentlewoman
(that is, one of her acquaintance farther up the street).'  She gave me
the like cue to the next house, naming another name that was also an
acquaintance of the gentlewoman of the house.

Away I went, and, coming to the house, I found them all in confusion,
you may be sure.  I ran in, and finding one of the maids, 'Lord!
sweetheart,' says I, 'how came this dismal accident?  Where is your
mistress?  Any how does she do?  Is she safe?  And where are the
children?  I come from Madam ---- to help you.'  Away runs the maid.
'Madam, madam,' says she, screaming as loud as she could yell, 'here is
a gentlewoman come from Madam ---- to help us.'  The poor woman, half
out of her wits, with a bundle under her arm, an two little children,
comes toward me.  'Lord! madam,' says I, 'let me carry the poor
children to Madam ----,' she desires you to send them; she'll take care
of the poor lambs;' and immediately I takes one of them out of her
hand, and she lifts the other up into my arms.  'Ay, do, for God's
sake,' says she, 'carry them to her.  Oh! thank her for her kindness.'
'Have you anything else to secure, madam?' says I; 'she will take care
of it.'  'Oh dear! ay,' says she, 'God bless her, and thank her. Take
this bundle of plate and carry it to her too.  Oh, she is a good woman.
Oh Lord! we are utterly ruined, utterly undone!'  And away she runs
from me out of her wits, and the maids after her; and away comes I with
the two children and the bundle.

I was no sooner got into the street but I saw another woman come to me.
'Oh!' says she, 'mistress,' in a piteous tone, 'you will let fall the
child.  Come, this is a sad time; let me help you'; and immediately
lays hold of my bundle to carry it for me.  'No,' says I; 'if you will
help me, take the child by the hand, and lead it for me but to the
upper end of the street; I'll go with you and satisfy you for your
pains.'

She could not avoid going, after what I said; but the creature, in
short, was one of the same business with me, and wanted nothing but the
bundle; however, she went with me to the door, for she could not help
it.  When we were come there I whispered her, 'Go, child,' said I, 'I
understand your trade; you may meet with purchase enough.'

She understood me and walked off.  I thundered at the door with the
children, and as the people were raised before by the noise of the
fire, I was soon let in, and I said, 'Is madam awake?  Pray tell her
Mrs. ---- desires the favour of her to take the two children in; poor
lady, she will be undone, their house is all of a flame,'  They took
the children in very civilly, pitied the family in distress, and away
came I with my bundle.  One of the maids asked me if  I was not to
leave the bundle too.  I said, 'No, sweetheart, 'tis to go to another
place; it does not belong to them.'

I was a great way out of the hurry now, and so I went on, clear of
anybody's inquiry, and brought the bundle of plate, which was very
considerable, straight home, and gave it to my old governess.  She told
me she would not look into it, but bade me go out again to look for
more.

She gave me the like cue to the gentlewoman of the next house to that
which was on fire, and I did my endeavour to go, but by this time the
alarm of fire was so great, and so many engines playing, and the street
so thronged with people, that I could not get near the house whatever I
would do; so I came back again to my governess's, and taking the bundle
up into my chamber, I began to examine it.  It is with horror that I
tell what a treasure I found there; 'tis enough to say, that besides
most of the family plate, which was considerable, I found a gold chain,
an old-fashioned thing, the locket of which was broken, so that I
suppose it had not been used some years, but the gold was not the worse
for that; also a little box of burying-rings, the lady's wedding-ring,
and some broken bits of old lockets of gold, a gold watch, and a purse
with about #24 value in old pieces of gold coin, and several other
things of value.

This was the greatest and the worst prize that ever I was concerned in;
for indeed, though, as I have said above, I was hardened now beyond the
power of all reflection in other cases, yet it really touched me to the
very soul when I looked into this treasure, to think of the poor
disconsolate gentlewoman who had lost so much by the fire besides; and
who would think, to be sure, that she had saved her plate and best
things; how she would be surprised and afflicted when she should find
that she had been deceived, and should find that the person that took
her children and her goods, had not come, as was pretended, from the
gentlewoman in the next street, but that the children had been put upon
her without her own knowledge.

I say, I confess the inhumanity of this action moved me very much, and
made me relent exceedingly, and tears stood in my eyes upon that
subject; but with all my sense of its being cruel and inhuman, I could
never find in my heart to make any restitution.  The reflection wore
off, and I began quickly to forget the circumstances that attended the
taking them.

Nor was this all; for though by this job I was become considerably
richer than before, yet the resolution I had formerly taken, of leaving
off this horrid trade when I had gotten a little more, did not return,
but I must still get farther, and more; and the avarice joined so with
the success, that I had no more thought of coming to a timely
alteration of life, though without it I could expect no safety, no
tranquillity in the possession of what I had so wickedly gained; but a
little more, and a little more, was the case still.

At length, yielding to the importunities of my crime, I cast off all
remorse and repentance, and all the reflections on that head turned to
no more than this, that I might perhaps come to have one booty more
that might complete my desires; but though I certainly had that one
booty, yet every hit looked towards another, and was so encouraging to
me to go on with the trade, that I had no gust to the thought of laying
it down.

In this condition, hardened by success, and resolving to go on, I fell
into the snare in which I was appointed to meet with my last reward for
this kind of life.  But even this was not yet, for I met with several
successful adventures more in this way of being undone.

I remained still with my governess, who was for a while really
concerned for the misfortune of my comrade that had been hanged, and
who, it seems, knew enough of my governess to have sent her the same
way, and which made her very uneasy; indeed, she was in a very great
fright.

It is true that when she was gone, and had not opened mouth to tell
what she knew, my governess was easy as to that point, and perhaps glad
she was hanged, for it was in her power to have obtained a pardon at
the expense of her friends; but on the other hand, the loss of her, and
the sense of her kindness in not making her market of what she knew,
moved my governess to mourn very sincerely for her.  I comforted her as
well as I could, and she in return hardened me to merit more completely
the same fate.

However, as I have said, it made me the more wary, and particularly I
was very shy of shoplifting, especially among the mercers and drapers,
who are a set of fellows that have their eyes very much about them.  I
made a venture or two among the lace folks and the milliners, and
particularly at one shop where I got notice of two young women who were
newly set up, and had not been bred to the trade.  There I think I
carried off a piece of bone-lace, worth six or seven pounds, and a
paper of thread.  But this was but once; it was a trick that would not
serve again.

It was always reckoned a safe job when we heard of a new shop, and
especially when the people were such as were not bred to shops.  Such
may depend upon it that they will be visited once or twice at their
beginning, and they must be very sharp indeed if they can prevent it.

I made another adventure or two, but they were but trifles too, though
sufficient to live on.  After this nothing considerable offering for a
good while, I began to think that I must give over the trade in
earnest; but my governess, who was not willing to lose me, and expected
great things of me, brought me one day into company with a young woman
and a fellow that went for her husband, though as it appeared
afterwards, she was not his wife, but they were partners, it seems, in
the trade they carried on, and partners in something else.  In short,
they robbed together, lay together, were taken together, and at last
were hanged together.

I came into a kind of league with these two by the help of my
governess, and they carried me out into three or four adventures, where
I rather saw them commit some coarse and unhandy robberies, in which
nothing but a great stock of impudence on their side, and gross
negligence on the people's side who were robbed, could have made them
successful.  So I resolved from that time forward to be very cautious
how I adventured upon anything with them; and indeed, when two or three
unlucky projects were proposed by them, I declined the offer, and
persuaded them against it.  One time they particularly proposed robbing
a watchmaker of three gold watches, which they had eyed in the daytime,
and found the place where he laid them.  One of them had so many keys
of all kinds, that he made no question to open the place where the
watchmaker had laid them; and so we made a kind of an appointment; but
when I came to look narrowly into the thing, I found they proposed
breaking open the house, and this, as a thing out of my way, I would
not embark in, so they went without me.  They did get into the house by
main force, and broke up the locked place where the watches were, but
found but one of the gold watches, and a silver one, which they took,
and got out of the house again very clear.  But the family, being
alarmed, cried out 'Thieves,' and the man was pursued and taken; the
young woman had got off too, but unhappily was stopped at a distance,
and the watches found upon her.  And thus I had a second escape, for
they were convicted, and both hanged, being old offenders, though but
young people.  As I said before that they robbed together and lay
together, so now they hanged together, and there ended my new
partnership.

I began now to be very wary, having so narrowly escaped a scouring, and
having such an example before me; but I had a new tempter, who prompted
me every day--I mean my governess; and now a prize presented, which as
it came by her management, so she expected a good share of the booty.
There was a good quantity of Flanders lace lodged in a private house,
where she had gotten intelligence of it, and Flanders lace being
prohibited, it was a good booty to any custom-house officer that could
come at it.  I had a full account from my governess, as well of the
quantity as of the very place where it was concealed, and I went to a
custom-house officer, and told him I had such a discovery to make to
him of such a quantity of lace, if he would assure me that I should
have my due share of the reward.  This was so just an offer, that
nothing could be fairer; so he agreed, and taking a constable and me
with him, we beset the house.  As I told him I could go directly to the
place, he left it to me; and the hole being very dark, I squeezed
myself into it, with a candle in my hand, and so reached the pieces out
to him, taking care as I gave him some so to secure as much about
myself as I could conveniently dispose of.  There was near #300 worth
of lace in the hole, and I secured about #50 worth of it to myself.
The people of the house were not owners of the lace, but a merchant who
had entrusted them with it; so that they were not so surprised as I
thought they would be.

I left the officer overjoyed with his prize, and fully satisfied with
what he had got, and appointed to meet him at a house of his own
directing, where I came after I had disposed of the cargo I had about
me, of which he had not the least suspicion.  When I came to him he
began to capitulate with me, believing I did not understand the right I
had to a share in the prize, and would fain have put me off with #20,
but I let him know that I was not so ignorant as he supposed I was; and
yet I was glad, too, that he offered to bring me to a certainty.

I asked #100, and he rose up to #30; I fell to #80, and he rose again
to #40; in a word, he offered #50, and I consented, only demanding a
piece of lace, which I thought came to about #8 or #9, as if it had been
for my own wear, and he agreed to it.  So I got #50 in money paid me
that same night, and made an end of the bargain; nor did he ever know
who I was, or where to inquire for me, so that if it had been
discovered that part of the goods were embezzled, he could have made no
challenge upon me for it.

I very punctually divided this spoil with my governess, and I passed
with her from this time for a very dexterous manager in the nicest
cases.  I found that this last was the best and easiest sort of work
that was in my way, and I made it my business to inquire out prohibited
goods, and after buying some, usually betrayed them, but none of these
discoveries amounted to anything considerable, not like that I related
just now; but I was willing to act safe, and was still cautious of
running the great risks which I found others did, and in which they
miscarried every day.

The next thing of moment was an attempt at a gentlewoman's good watch.
It happened in a crowd, at a meeting-house, where I was in very great
danger of being taken.  I had full hold of her watch, but giving a
great jostle, as if somebody had thrust me against her, and in the
juncture giving the watch a fair pull, I found it would not come, so I
let it go that moment, and cried out as if I had been killed, that
somebody had trod upon my foot, and that there were certainly
pickpockets there, for somebody or other had given a pull at my watch;
for you are to observe that on these adventures we always went very
well dressed, and I had very good clothes on, and a gold watch by my
side, as like a lady as other fold.

I had no sooner said so, but the other gentlewoman cried out 'A
pickpocket' too, for somebody, she said, had tried to pull her watch
away.

When I touched her watch I was close to her, but when I cried out I
stopped as it were short, and the crowd bearing her forward a little,
she made a noise too, but it was at some distance from me, so that she
did not in the least suspect me; but when she cried out 'A pickpocket,'
somebody cried, 'Ay, and here has been another! this gentlewoman has
been attempted too.'

At that very instance, a little farther in the crowd, and very luckily
too, they cried out 'A pickpocket,' again, and really seized a young
fellow in the very act.  This, though unhappy for the wretch, was very
opportunely for my case, though I had carried it off handsomely enough
before; but now it was out of doubt, and all the loose part of the
crowd ran that way, and the poor boy was delivered up to the rage of
the street, which is a cruelty I need not describe, and which, however,
they are always glad of, rather than to be sent to Newgate, where they
lie often a long time, till they are almost perished, and sometimes
they are hanged, and the best they can look for, if they are convicted,
is to be transported.

This was a narrow escape to me, and I was so frighted that I ventured
no more at gold watches a great while.  There was indeed a great many
concurring circumstances in this adventure which assisted to my escape;
but the chief was, that the woman whose watch I had pulled at was a
fool; that is to say, she was ignorant of the nature of the attempt,
which one would have thought she should not have been, seeing she was
wise enough to fasten her watch so that it could not be slipped up.
But she was in such a fright that she had no thought about her proper
for the discovery; for she, when she felt the pull, screamed out, and
pushed herself forward, and put all the people about her into disorder,
but said not a word of her watch, or of a pickpocket, for at least two
minutes' time, which was time enough for me, and to spare.  For as I
had cried out behind her, as I have said, and bore myself back in the
crowd as she bore forward, there were several people, at least seven or
eight, the throng being still moving on, that were got between me and
her in that time, and then I crying out 'A pickpocket,' rather sooner
than she, or at least as soon, she might as well be the person
suspected as I, and the people were confused in their inquiry; whereas,
had she with a presence of mind needful on such an occasion, as soon as
she felt the pull, not screamed out as she did, but turned immediately
round and seized the next body that was behind her, she had infallibly
taken me.

This is a direction not of the kindest sort to the fraternity, but 'tis
certainly a key to the clue of a pickpocket's motions, and whoever can
follow it will as certainly catch the thief as he will be sure to miss
if he does not.

I had another adventure, which puts this matter out of doubt, and which
may be an instruction for posterity in the case of a pickpocket.  My
good old governess, to give a short touch at her history, though she
had left off the trade, was, as I may say, born a pickpocket, and, as I
understood afterwards, had run through all the several degrees of that
art, and yet had never been taken but once, when she was so grossly
detected, that she was convicted and ordered to be transported; but
being a woman of a rare tongue, and withal having money in her pocket,
she found means, the ship putting into Ireland for provisions, to get
on shore there, where she lived and practised her old trade for some
years; when falling into another sort of bad company, she turned
midwife and procuress, and played a hundred pranks there, which she
gave me a little history of in confidence between us as we grew more
intimate; and it was to this wicked creature that I owed all the art
and dexterity I arrived to, in which there were few that ever went
beyond me, or that practised so long without any misfortune.

It was after those adventures in Ireland, and when she was pretty well
known in that country, that she left Dublin and came over to England,
where, the time of her transportation being not expired, she left her
former trade, for fear of falling into bad hands again, for then she
was sure to have gone to wreck.  Here she set up the same trade she had
followed in Ireland, in which she soon, by her admirable management and
good tongue, arrived to the height which I have already described, and
indeed began to be rich, though her trade fell off again afterwards, as
I have hinted before.

I mentioned thus much of the history of this woman here, the better to
account for the concern she had in the wicked life I was now leading,
into all the particulars of which she led me, as it were, by the hand,
and gave me such directions, and I so well followed them, that I grew
the greatest artist of my time and worked myself out of every danger
with such dexterity, that when several more of my comrades ran
themselves into Newgate presently, and by that time they had been half
a year at the trade, I had now practised upwards of five years, and the
people at Newgate did not so much as know me; they had heard much of me
indeed, and often expected me there, but I always got off, though many
times in the extremest danger.

One of the greatest dangers I was now in, was that I was too well known
among the trade, and some of them, whose hatred was owing rather to
envy than any injury I had done them, began to be angry that I should
always escape when they were always catched and hurried to Newgate.
These were they that gave me the name of Moll Flanders; for it was no
more of affinity with my real name or with any of the name I had ever
gone by, than black is of kin to white, except that once, as before, I
called myself Mrs. Flanders; when I sheltered myself in the Mint; but
that these rogues never knew, nor could I ever learn how they came to
give me the name, or what the occasion of it was.

I was soon informed that some of these who were gotten fast into
Newgate had vowed to impeach me; and as I knew that two or three of
them were but too able to do it, I was under a great concern about it,
and kept within doors for a good while.  But my governess--whom I
always made partner in my success, and who now played a sure game with
me, for that she had a share of the gain and no share in the hazard--I
say, my governess was something impatient of my leading such a useless,
unprofitable life, as she called it; and she laid a new contrivance for
my going abroad, and this was to dress me up in men's clothes, and so
put me into a new kind of practice.

I was tall and personable, but a little too smooth-faced for a man;
however, I seldom went abroad but in the night, it did well enough; but
it was a long time before I could behave in my new clothes--I mean, as
to my craft.  It was impossible to be so nimble, so ready, so dexterous
at these things in a dress so contrary to nature; and I did everything
clumsily, so I had neither the success nor the easiness of escape that
I had before, and I resolved to leave it off; but that resolution was
confirmed soon after by the following accident.

As my governess disguised me like a man, so she joined me with a man, a
young fellow that was nimble enough at his business, and for about
three weeks we did very well together.  Our principal trade was
watching shopkeepers' counters, and slipping off any kind of goods we
could see carelessly laid anywhere, and we made several good bargains,
as we called them, at this work.  And as we kept always together, so we
grew very intimate, yet he never knew that I was not a man, nay, though
I several times went home with him to his lodgings, according as our
business directed, and four or five times lay with him all night.  But
our design lay another way, and it was absolutely necessary to me to
conceal my sex from him, as appeared afterwards.  The circumstances of
our living, coming in late, and having such and such business to do as
required that nobody should be trusted with the coming into our
lodgings, were such as made it impossible to me to refuse lying with
him, unless I would have owned my sex; and as it was, I effectually
concealed myself.  But his ill, and my good fortune, soon put an end to
this life, which I must own I was sick of too, on several other
accounts.  We had made several prizes in this new way of business, but
the last would be extraordinary.  There was a shop in a certain street
which had a warehouse behind it that looked into another street, the
house making the corner of the turning.

Through the window of the warehouse we saw, lying on the counter or
showboard, which was just before it, five pieces of silks, besides
other stuffs, and though it was almost dark, yet the people, being busy
in the fore-shop with customers, had not had time to shut up those
windows, or else had forgot it.

This the young fellow was so overjoyed with, that he could not restrain
himself.  It lay all within his reach he said, and he swore violently
to me that he would have it, if he broke down the house for it.  I
dissuaded him a little, but saw there was no remedy; so he ran rashly
upon it, slipped out a square of the sash window dexterously enough,
and without noise, and got out four pieces of the silks, and came with
them towards me, but was immediately pursued with a terrible clutter
and noise.  We were standing together indeed, but I had not taken any
of the goods out of his hand, when I said to him hastily, 'You are
undone, fly, for God's sake!'  He ran like lightning, and I too, but
the pursuit was hotter after him because he had the goods, than after
me.  He dropped two of the pieces, which stopped them a little, but the
crowd increased and pursued us both.  They took him soon after with the
other two pieces upon him, and then the rest followed me.  I ran for it
and got into my governess's house whither some quick-eyed people
followed me to warmly as to fix me there.  They did not immediately
knock, at the door, by which I got time to throw off my disguise and
dress me in my own clothes; besides, when they came there, my
governess, who had her tale ready, kept her door shut, and called out
to them and told them there was no man come in there.  The people
affirmed there did a man come in there, and swore they would break open
the door.

My governess, not at all surprised, spoke calmly to them, told them
they should very freely come and search her house, if they should bring
a constable, and let in none but such as the constable would admit, for
it was unreasonable to let in a whole crowd.  This they could not
refuse, though they were a crowd.  So a constable was fetched
immediately, and she very freely opened the door; the constable kept
the door, and the men he appointed searched the house, my governess
going with them from room to room.  When she came to my room she called
to me, and said aloud, 'Cousin, pray open the door; here's some
gentlemen that must come and look into your room.'

I had a little girl with me, which was my governess's grandchild, as
she called her; and I bade her open the door, and there sat I at work
with a great litter of things about me, as if I had been at work all
day, being myself quite undressed, with only night-clothes on my head,
and a loose morning-gown wrapped about me.  My governess made a kind of
excuse for their disturbing me, telling me partly the occasion of it,
and that she had no remedy but to open the doors to them, and let them
satisfy themselves, for all she could say to them would not satisfy
them.  I sat still, and bid them search the room if they pleased, for
if there was anybody in the house, I was sure they were not in my room;
and as for the rest of the house, I had nothing to say to that, I did
not understand what they looked for.

Everything looked so innocent and so honest about me, that they treated
me civiller than I expected, but it was not till they had searched the
room to a nicety, even under the bed, in the bed, and everywhere else
where it was possible anything could be hid.  When they had done this,
and could find nothing, they asked my pardon for troubling me, and went
down.

When they had thus searched the house from bottom to top, and then top
to bottom, and could find nothing, they appeased the mob pretty well;
but they carried my governess before the justice.  Two men swore that
they saw the man whom they pursued go into her house.  My governess
rattled and made a great noise that her house should be insulted, and
that she should be used thus for nothing; that if a man did come in, he
might go out again presently for aught she knew, for she was ready to
make oath that no man had been within her doors all that day as she
knew of (and that was very true indeed); that it might be indeed that
as she was abovestairs, any fellow in a fright might find the door open
and run in for shelter when he was pursued, but that she knew nothing
of it; and if it had been so, he certainly went out again, perhaps at
the other door, for she had another door into an alley, and so had made
his escape and cheated them all.

This was indeed probable enough, and the justice satisfied himself with
giving her an oath that she had not received or admitted any man into
her house to conceal him, or protect or hide him from justice.  This
oath she might justly take, and did so, and so she was dismissed.

It is easy to judge what a fright I was in upon this occasion, and it
was impossible for my governess ever to bring me to dress in that
disguise again; for, as I told her, I should certainly betray myself.

My poor partner in this mischief was now in a bad case, for he was
carried away before my Lord Mayor, and by his worship committed to
Newgate, and the people that took him were so willing, as well as able,
to prosecute him, that they offered themselves to enter into
recognisances to appear at the sessions and pursue the charge against
him.

However, he got his indictment deferred, upon promise to discover his
accomplices, and particularly the man that was concerned with him in
his robbery; and he failed not to do his endeavour, for he gave in my
name, whom he called Gabriel Spencer, which was the name I went by to
him; and here appeared the wisdom of my concealing my name and sex from
him, which, if he had ever known I had been undone.

He did all he could to discover this Gabriel Spencer; he described me,
he discovered the place where he said I lodged, and, in a word, all the
particulars that he could of my dwelling; but having concealed the main
circumstances of my sex from him, I had a vast advantage, and he never
could hear of me.  He brought two or three families into trouble by his
endeavouring to find me out, but they knew nothing of me, any more than
that I had a fellow with me that they had seen, but knew nothing of.
And as for my governess, though she was the means of his coming to me,
yet it was done at second-hand, and he knew nothing of her.

This turned to his disadvantage; for having promised discoveries, but
not being able to make it good, it was looked upon as trifling with the
justice of the city, and he was the more fiercely pursued by the
shopkeepers who took him.

I was, however, terribly uneasy all this while, and that I might be
quite out of the way, I went away from my governess's for a while; but
not knowing wither to wander, I took a maid-servant with me, and took
the stage-coach to Dunstable, to my old landlord and landlady, where I
had lived so handsomely with my Lancashire husband.  Here I told her a
formal story, that I expected my husband every day from Ireland, and
that I had sent a letter to him that I would meet him at Dunstable at
her house, and that he would certainly land, if the wind was fair, in a
few days, so that I was come to spend a few days with them till he
should come, for he was either come post, or in the West Chester coach,
I knew not which; but whichsoever it was, he would be sure to come to
that house to meet me.

My landlady was mighty glad to see me, and my landlord made such a stir
with me, that if I had been a princess I could not have been better
used, and here I might have been welcome a month or two if I had
thought fit.

But my business was of another nature.  I was very uneasy (though so
well disguised that it was scarce possible to detect me) lest this
fellow should somehow or other find me out; and though he could not
charge me with this robbery, having persuaded him not to venture, and
having also done nothing in it myself but run away, yet he might have
charged me with other things, and have bought his own life at the
expense of mine.

This filled me with horrible apprehensions.  I had no recourse, no
friend, no confidante but my old governess, and I knew no remedy but to
put my life in her hands, and so I did, for I let her know where to
send to me, and had several letters from her while I stayed here.  Some
of them almost scared me out my wits but at last she sent me the joyful
news that he was hanged, which was the best news to me that I had heard
a great while.

I had stayed here five weeks, and lived very comfortably indeed (the
secret anxiety of my mind excepted); but when I received this letter I
looked pleasantly again, and told my landlady that I had received a
letter from my spouse in Ireland, that I had the good news of his being
very well, but had the bad news that his business would not permit him
to come away so soon as he expected, and so I was like to go back again
without him.

My landlady complimented me upon the good news however, that I had
heard he was well.  'For I have observed, madam,' says she, 'you hadn't
been so pleasant as you used to be; you have been over head and ears in
care for him, I dare say,' says the good woman; ''tis easy to be seen
there's an alteration in you for the better,' says she.  'Well, I am
sorry the esquire can't come yet,' says my landlord; 'I should have
been heartily glad to have seen him.  But I hope, when you have certain
news of his coming, you'll take a step hither again, madam,' says he;
'you shall be very welcome whenever you please to come.'

With all these fine compliments we parted, and I came merry enough to
London, and found my governess as well pleased as I was.  And now she
told me she would never recommend any partner to me again, for she
always found, she said, that I had the best luck when I ventured by
myself.  And so indeed I had, for I was seldom in any danger when I was
by myself, or if I was, I got out of it with more dexterity than when I
was entangled with the dull measures of other people, who had perhaps
less forecast, and were more rash and impatient than I; for though I
had as much courage to venture as any of them, yet I used more caution
before I undertook a thing, and had more presence of mind when I was to
bring myself off.

I have often wondered even at my own hardiness another way, that when
all my companions were surprised and fell so suddenly into the hand of
justice, and that I so narrowly escaped, yet I could not all this while
enter into one serious resolution to leave off this trade, and
especially considering that I was now very far from being poor; that
the temptation of necessity, which is generally the introduction of all
such wickedness, was now removed; for I had near #500 by me in ready
money, on which I might have lived very well, if I had thought fit to
have retired; but I say, I had not so much as the least inclination to
leave off; no, not so much as I had before when I had but #200
beforehand, and when I had no such frightful examples before my eyes as
these were.  From hence 'tis evident to me, that when once we are
hardened in crime, no fear can affect us, no example give us any
warning.

I had indeed one comrade whose fate went very near me for a good while,
though I wore it off too in time.  That case was indeed very unhappy.
I had made a prize of a piece of very good damask in a mercer's shop,
and went clear off myself, but had conveyed the piece to this companion
of mine when we went out of the shop, and she went one way and I went
another.  We had not been long out of the shop but the mercer missed
his piece of stuff, and sent his messengers, one one way and one
another, and they presently seized her that had the piece, with the
damask upon her.  As for me, I had very luckily stepped into a house
where there was a lace chamber, up one pair of stairs, and had the
satisfaction, or the terror indeed, of looking out of the window upon
the noise they made, and seeing the poor creature dragged away in
triumph to the justice, who immediately committed her to Newgate.

I was careful to attempt nothing in the lace chamber, but tumbled their
goods pretty much to spend time; then bought a few yards of edging and
paid for it, and came away very sad-hearted indeed for the poor woman,
who was in tribulation for what I only had stolen.

Here again my old caution stood me in good stead; namely, that though I
often robbed with these people, yet I never let them know who I was, or
where I lodged, nor could they ever find out my lodging, though they
often endeavoured to watch me to it.  They all knew me by the name of
Moll Flanders, though even some of them rather believed I was she than
knew me to be so.  My name was public among them indeed, but how to
find me out they knew not, nor so much as how to guess at my quarters,
whether they were at the east end of the town or the west; and this
wariness was my safety upon all these occasions.

I kept close a great while upon the occasion of this woman's disaster.
I knew that if I should do anything that should miscarry, and should be
carried to prison, she would be there and ready to witness against me,
and perhaps save her life at my expense.  I considered that I began to
be very well known by name at the Old Bailey, though they did not know
my face, and that if I should fall into their hands, I should be
treated as an old offender; and for this reason I was resolved to see
what this poor creature's fate should be before I stirred abroad,
though several times in her distress I conveyed money to her for her
relief.

At length she came to her trial.  She pleaded she did not steal the
thing, but that one Mrs. Flanders, as she heard her called (for she did
not know her), gave the bundle to her after they came out of the shop,
and bade her carry it home to her lodging.  They asked her where this
Mrs. Flanders was, but she could not produce her, neither could she
give the least account of me; and the mercer's men swearing positively
that she was in the shop when the goods were stolen, that they
immediately missed them, and pursued her, and found them upon her,
thereupon the jury brought her in guilty; but the Court, considering
that she was really not the person that stole the goods, an inferior
assistant, and that it was very possible she could not find out this
Mrs. Flanders, meaning me, though it would save her life, which indeed
was true--I say, considering all this, they allowed her to be
transported, which was the utmost favour she could obtain, only that
the Court told her that if she could in the meantime produce the said
Mrs. Flanders, they would intercede for her pardon; that is to say, if
she could find me out, and hand me, she should not be transported.
This I took care to make impossible to her, and so she was shipped off
in pursuance of her sentence a little while after.

I must repeat it again, that the fate of this poor woman troubled me
exceedingly, and I began to be very pensive, knowing that I was really
the instrument of her disaster; but the preservation of my own life,
which was so evidently in danger, took off all my tenderness; and
seeing that she was not put to death, I was very easy at her
transportation, because she was then out of the way of doing me any
mischief, whatever should happen.

The disaster of this woman was some months before that of the
last-recited story, and was indeed partly occasion of my governess
proposing to dress me up in men's clothes, that I might go about
unobserved, as indeed I did; but I was soon tired of that disguise, as
I have said, for indeed it exposed me to too many difficulties.

I was now easy as to all fear of witnesses against me, for all those
that had either been concerned with me, or that knew me by the name of
Moll Flanders, were either hanged or transported; and if I should have
had the misfortune to be taken, I might call myself anything else, as
well as Moll Flanders, and no old sins could be placed into my account;
so I began to run a-tick again with the more freedom, and several
successful adventures I made, though not such as I had made before.

We had at that time another fire happened not a great way off from the
place where my governess lived, and I made an attempt there, as before,
but as I was not soon enough before the crowd of people came in, and
could not get to the house I aimed at, instead of a prize, I got a
mischief, which had almost put a period to my life and all my wicked
doings together; for the fire being very furious, and the people in a
great fright in removing their goods, and throwing them out of window,
a wench from out of a window threw a feather-bed just upon me.  It is
true, the bed being soft, it broke no bones; but as the weight was
great, and made greater by the fall, it beat me down, and laid me dead
for a while.  Nor did the people concern themselves much to deliver me
from it, or to recover me at all; but I lay like one dead and neglected
a good while, till somebody going to remove the bed out of the way,
helped me up.  It was indeed a wonder the people in the house had not
thrown other goods out after it, and which might have fallen upon it,
and then I had been inevitably killed; but I was reserved for further
afflictions.

This accident, however, spoiled my market for that time, and I came
home to my governess very much hurt and bruised, and frighted to the
last degree, and it was a good while before she could set me upon my
feet again.

It was now a merry time of the year, and Bartholomew Fair was begun.  I
had never made any walks that way, nor was the common part of the fair
of much advantage to me; but I took a turn this year into the
cloisters, and among the rest I fell into one of the raffling shops.
It was a thing of no great consequence to me, nor did I expect to make
much of it; but there came a gentleman extremely well dressed and very
rich, and as 'tis frequent to talk to everybody in those shops, he
singled me out, and was very particular with me.  First he told me he
would put in for me to raffle, and did so; and some small matter coming
to his lot, he presented it to me (I think it was a feather muff); then
he continued to keep talking to me with a more than common appearance
of respect, but still very civil, and much like a gentleman.

He held me in talk so long, till at last he drew me out of the raffling
place to the shop-door, and then to a walk in the cloister, still
talking of a thousand things cursorily without anything to the purpose.
At last he told me that, without compliment, he was charmed with my
company, and asked me if I durst trust myself in a coach with him; he
told me he was a man of honour, and would not offer anything to me
unbecoming him as such.  I seemed to decline it a while, but suffered
myself to be importuned a little, and then yielded.

I was at a loss in my thoughts to conclude at first what this gentleman
designed; but I found afterwards he had had some drink in his head, and
that he was not very unwilling to have some more.  He carried me in the
coach to the Spring Garden, at Knightsbridge, where we walked in the
gardens, and he treated me very handsomely; but I found he drank very
freely.  He pressed me also to drink, but I declined it.

Hitherto he kept his word with me, and offered me nothing amiss.  We
came away in the coach again, and he brought me into the streets, and
by this time it was near ten o'clock at night, and he stopped the coach
at a house where, it seems, he was acquainted, and where they made no
scruple to show us upstairs into a room with a bed in it.  At first I
seemed to be unwilling to go up, but after a few words I yielded to
that too, being willing to see the end of it, and in hope to make
something of it at last.  As for the bed, etc., I was not much
concerned about that part.

Here he began to be a little freer with me than he had promised; and I
by little and little yielded to everything, so that, in a word, he did
what he pleased with me; I need say no more.  All this while he drank
freely too, and about one in the morning we went into the coach again.
The air and the shaking of the coach made the drink he had get more up
in his head than it was before, and he grew uneasy in the coach, and
was for acting over again what he had been doing before; but as I
thought my game now secure, I resisted him, and brought him to be a
little still, which had not lasted five minutes but he fell fast asleep.

I took this opportunity to search him to a nicety.  I took a gold
watch, with a silk purse of gold, his fine full-bottom periwig and
silver-fringed gloves, his sword and fine snuff-box, and gently opening
the coach door, stood ready to jump out while the coach was going on;
but the coach stopped in the narrow street beyond Temple Bar to let
another coach pass, I got softly out, fastened the door again, and gave
my gentleman and the coach the slip both together, and never heard more
of them.

This was an adventure indeed unlooked for, and perfectly undesigned by
me; though I was not so past the merry part of life, as to forget how
to behave, when a fop so blinded by his appetite should not know an old
woman from a young.  I did not indeed look so old as I was by ten or
twelve years; yet I was not a young wench of seventeen, and it was easy
enough to be distinguished.  There is nothing so absurd, so surfeiting,
so ridiculous, as a man heated by wine in his head, and wicked gust in
his inclination together; he is in the possession of two devils at
once, and can no more govern himself by his reason than a mill can
grind without water; his vice tramples upon all that was in him that
had any good in it, if any such thing there was; nay, his very sense is
blinded by its own rage, and he acts absurdities even in his views;
such a drinking more, when he is drunk already; picking up a common
woman, without regard to what she is or who she is, whether sound or
rotten, clean or unclean, whether ugly or handsome, whether old or
young, and so blinded as not really to distinguish.  Such a man is
worse than a lunatic; prompted by his vicious, corrupted head, he no
more knows what he is doing than this wretch of mine knew when I picked
his pocket of his watch and his purse of gold.

These are the men of whom Solomon says, 'They go like an ox to the
slaughter, till a dart strikes through their liver'; an admirable
description, by the way, of the foul disease, which is a poisonous
deadly contagion mingling with the blood, whose centre or foundation is
in the liver; from whence, by the swift circulation of the whole mass,
that dreadful nauseous plague strikes immediately through his liver,
and his spirits are infected, his vitals stabbed through as with a dart.

It is true this poor unguarded wretch was in no danger from me, though
I was greatly apprehensive at first of what danger I might be in from
him; but he was really to be pitied in one respect, that he seemed to
be a good sort of man in himself; a gentleman that had no harm in his
design; a man of sense, and of a fine behaviour, a comely handsome
person, a sober solid countenance, a charming beautiful face, and
everything that could be agreeable; only had unhappily had some drink
the night before, had not been in bed, as he told me when we were
together; was hot, and his blood fired with wine, and in that condition
his reason, as it were asleep, had given him up.

As for me, my business was his money, and what I could make of him; and
after that, if I could have found out any way to have done it, I would
have sent him safe home to his house and to his family, for 'twas ten
to one but he had an honest, virtuous wife and innocent children, that
were anxious for his safety, and would have been glad to have gotten
him home, and have taken care of him till he was restored to himself.
And then with what shame and regret would he look back upon himself!
how would he reproach himself with associating himself with a whore!
picked up in the worst of all holes, the cloister, among the dirt and
filth of all the town! how would he be trembling for fear he had got
the pox, for fear a dart had struck through his liver, and hate himself
every time he looked back upon the madness and brutality of his
debauch! how would he, if he had any principles of honour, as I verily
believe he had--I say, how would he abhor the thought of giving any ill
distemper, if he had it, as for aught he knew he might, to his modest
and virtuous wife, and thereby sowing the contagion in the life-blood
of his posterity.

Would such gentlemen but consider the contemptible thoughts which the
very women they are concerned with, in such cases as these, have of
them, it would be a surfeit to them.  As I said above, they value not
the pleasure, they are raised by no inclination to the man, the passive
jade thinks of no pleasure but the money; and when he is, as it were,
drunk in the ecstasies of his wicked pleasure, her hands are in his
pockets searching for what she can find there, and of which he can no
more be sensible in the moment of his folly that he can forethink of it
when he goes about it.

I knew a woman that was so dexterous with a fellow, who indeed deserved
no better usage, that while he was busy with her another way, conveyed
his purse with twenty guineas in it out of his fob-pocket, where he had
put it for fear of her, and put another purse with gilded counters in
it into the room of it.  After he had done, he says to her, 'Now han't
you picked my pocket?'  She jested with him, and told him she supposed
he had not much to lose; he put his hand to his fob, and with his
fingers felt that his purse was there, which fully satisfied him, and
so she brought off his money.  And this was a trade with her; she kept
a sham gold watch, that is, a watch of silver gilt, and a purse of
counters in her pocket to be ready on all such occasions, and I doubt
not practiced it with success.

I came home with this last booty to my governess, and really when I
told her the story, it so affected her that she was hardly able to
forbear tears, to know how such a gentleman ran a daily risk of being
undone every time a glass of wine got into his head.

But as to the purchase I got, and how entirely I stripped him, she told
me it pleased her wonderfully.  'Nay child,' says she, 'the usage may,
for aught I know, do more to reform him than all the sermons that ever
he will hear in his life.'  And if the remainder of the story be true,
so it did.

I found the next day she was wonderful inquisitive about this
gentleman; the description I had given her of him, his dress, his
person, his face, everything concurred to make her think of a gentleman
whose character she knew, and family too.  She mused a while, and I
going still on with the particulars, she starts up; says she, 'I'll lay
#100 I know the gentleman.'

'I am sorry you do,' says I, 'for I would not have him exposed on any
account in the world; he has had injury enough already by me, and I
would not be instrumental to do him any more.' 'No, no,' says she, 'I
will do him no injury, I assure you, but you may let me satisfy my
curiosity a little, for if it is he, I warrant you I find it out.'  I
was a little startled at that, and told her, with an apparent concern
in my face, that by the same rule he might find me out, and then I was
undone.  She returned warmly, 'Why, do you think I will betray you,
child?  No, no,' says she, 'not for all he is worth in the world.  I
have kept your counsel in worse things than these; sure you may trust
me in this.'  So I said no more at that time.

She laid her scheme another way, and without acquainting me of it, but
she was resolved to find it out if possible.  So she goes to a certain
friend of hers who was acquainted in the family that she guessed at,
and told her friend she had some extraordinary business with such a
gentleman (who, by the way, was no less than a baronet, and of a very
good family), and that she knew not how to come at him without somebody
to introduce her.  Her friend promised her very readily to do it, and
accordingly goes to the house to see if the gentleman was in town.

The next day she come to my governess and tells her that Sir ---- was
at home, but that he had met with a disaster and was very ill, and
there was no speaking with him.  'What disaster?' says my governess
hastily, as if she was surprised at it.  'Why,' says her friend, 'he
had been at Hampstead to visit a gentleman of his acquaintance, and as
he came back again he was set upon and robbed; and having got a little
drink too, as they suppose, the rogues abused him, and he is very ill.'
'Robbed!' says my governess, 'and what did they take from him?'  'Why,'
says her friend, 'they took his gold watch and his gold snuff-box, his
fine periwig, and what money he had in his pocket, which was
considerable, to be sure, for Sir ---- never goes without a purse of
guineas about him.'

'Pshaw!' says my old governess, jeering, 'I warrant you he has got
drunk now and got a whore, and she has picked his pocket, and so he
comes home to his wife and tells her he has been robbed.  That's an old
sham; a thousand such tricks are put upon the poor women every day.'

'Fie!' says her friend, 'I find you don't know Sir ----; why he is as
civil a gentleman, there is not a finer man, nor a soberer, graver,
modester person in the whole city; he abhors such things; there's
nobody that knows him will think such a thing of him.' 'Well, well,'
says my governess, 'that's none of my business; if it was, I warrant I
should find there was something of that kind in it; your modest men in
common opinion are sometimes no better than other people, only they
keep a better character, or, if you please, are the better hypocrites.'

'No, no,' says her friend, 'I can assure you Sir ---- is no hypocrite,
he is really an honest, sober gentleman, and he has certainly been
robbed.'  'Nay,' says my governess, 'it may be he has; it is no
business of mine, I tell you; I only want to speak with him; my
business is of another nature.'  'But,' says her friend, 'let your
business be of what nature it will, you cannot see him yet, for he is
not fit to be seen, for he is very ill, and bruised very much,'  'Ay,'
says my governess, 'nay, then he has fallen into bad hands, to be
sure,'  And then she asked gravely, 'Pray, where is he bruised?'  'Why,
in the head,' says her friend, 'and one of his hands, and his face, for
they used him barbarously.'  'Poor gentleman,' says my governess, 'I
must wait, then, till he recovers'; and adds, 'I hope it will not be
long, for I want very much to speak with him.'

Away she comes to me and tells me this story.  'I have found out your
fine gentleman, and a fine gentleman he was,' says she; 'but, mercy on
him, he is in a sad pickle now.  I wonder what the d--l you have done
to him; why, you have almost killed him.'  I looked at her with
disorder enough.  'I killed him!' says I; 'you must mistake the person;
I am sure I did nothing to him; he was very well when I left him,' said
I, 'only drunk and fast asleep.'  'I know nothing of that,' says she,
'but he is in a sad pickle now'; and so she told me all that her friend
had said to her.  'Well, then,' says I, 'he fell into bad hands after I
left him, for I am sure I left him safe enough.'

About ten days after, or a little more, my governess goes again to her
friend, to introduce her to this gentleman; she had inquired other ways
in the meantime, and found that he was about again, if not abroad
again, so she got leave to speak with him.

She was a woman of a admirable address, and wanted nobody to introduce
her; she told her tale much better than I shall be able to tell it for
her, for she was a mistress of her tongue, as I have said already.  She
told him that she came, though a stranger, with a single design of
doing him a service and he should find she had no other end in it; that
as she came purely on so friendly an account, she begged promise from
him, that if he did not accept what she should officiously propose he
would not take it ill that she meddled with what was not her business.
She assured him that as what she had to say was a secret that belonged
to him only, so whether he accepted her offer or not, it should remain
a secret to all the world, unless he exposed it himself; nor should his
refusing her service in it make her so little show her respect as to do
him the least injury, so that he should be entirely at liberty to act
as he thought fit.

He looked very shy at first, and said he knew nothing that related to
him that required much secrecy; that he had never done any man any
wrong, and cared not what anybody might say of him; that it was no part
of his character to be unjust to anybody, nor could he imagine in what
any man could render him any service; but that if it was so
disinterested a service as she said, he could not take it ill from any
one that they should endeavour to serve him; and so, as it were, left
her a liberty either to tell him or not to tell, as she thought fit.

She found him so perfectly indifferent, that she was almost afraid to
enter into the point with him; but, however, after some other
circumlocutions she told him that by a strange and unaccountable
accident she came to have a particular knowledge of the late unhappy
adventure he had fallen into, and that in such a manner, that there was
nobody in the world but herself and him that were acquainted with it,
no, not the very person that was with him.

He looked a little angrily at first.  'What adventure?' said he.
'Why,' said she, 'of your being robbed coming from Knightbr----;
Hampstead, sir, I should say,' says she.  'Be not surprised, sir,' says
she, 'that I am able to tell you every step you took that day from the
cloister in Smithfield to the Spring Garden at Knightsbridge, and
thence to the ---- in the Strand, and how you were left asleep in the
coach afterwards.  I say, let not this surprise you, for, sir, I do not
come to make a booty of you, I ask nothing of you, and I assure you the
woman that was with you knows nothing who you are, and never shall; and
yet perhaps I may serve you further still, for I did not come barely to
let you know that I was informed of these things, as if I wanted a
bribe to conceal them; assure yourself, sir,' said she, 'that whatever
you think fit to do or say to me, it shall be all a secret as it is, as
much as if I were in my grave.'

He was astonished at her discourse, and said gravely to her, 'Madam,
you are a stranger to me, but it is very unfortunate that you should be
let into the secret of the worst action of my life, and a thing that I
am so justly ashamed of, that the only satisfaction of it to me was,
that I thought it was known only to God and my own conscience.'  'Pray,
sir,' says she, 'do not reckon the discovery of it to me to be any part
of your misfortune.  It was a thing, I believe, you were surprised
into, and perhaps the woman used some art to prompt you to it; however,
you will never find any just cause,' said she, 'to repent that I came
to hear of it; nor can your own mouth be more silent in it that I have
been, and ever shall be.'

'Well,' says he, 'but let me do some justice to the woman too; whoever
she is, I do assure you she prompted me to nothing, she rather declined
me.  It was my own folly and madness that brought me into it all, ay,
and brought her into it too; I must give her her due so far.  As to
what she took from me, I could expect no less from her in the condition
I was in, and to this hour I know not whether she robbed me or the
coachman; if she did it, I forgive her, and I think all gentlemen that
do so should be used in the same manner; but I am more concerned for
some other things that I am for all that she took from me.'

My governess now began to come into the whole matter, and he opened
himself freely to her.  First she said to him, in answer to what he had
said about me, 'I am glad, sir, you are so just to the person that you
were with; I assure you she is a gentlewoman, and no woman of the town;
and however you prevailed with her so far as you did, I am sure 'tis
not her practice.  You ran a great venture indeed, sir; but if that be
any part of your care, I am persuaded you may be perfectly easy, for I
dare assure you no man has touched her, before you, since her husband,
and he has been dead now almost eight years.'

It appeared that this was his grievance, and that he was in a very
great fright about it; however, when my governess said this to him, he
appeared very well pleased, and said, 'Well, madam, to be plain with
you, if I was satisfied of that, I should not so much value what I
lost; for, as to that, the temptation was great, and perhaps she was
poor and wanted it.'  'If she had not been poor, sir ----,' says my
governess, 'I assure you she would never have yielded to you; and as
her poverty first prevailed with her to let you do as you did, so the
same poverty prevailed with her to pay herself at last, when she saw
you were in such a condition, that if she had not done it, perhaps the
next coachman might have done it.'

'Well,' says he, 'much good may it do her.  I say again, all the
gentlemen that do so ought to be used in the same manner, and then they
would be cautious of themselves.  I have no more concern about it, but
on the score which you hinted at before, madam.'  Here he entered into
some freedoms with her on the subject of what passed between us, which
are not so proper for a woman to write, and the great terror that was
upon his mind with relation to his wife, for fear he should have
received any injury from me, and should communicate if farther; and
asked her at last if she could not procure him an opportunity to speak
with me.  My governess gave him further assurances of my being a woman
clear from any such thing, and that he was as entirely safe in that
respect as he was with his own lady; but as for seeing me, she said it
might be of dangerous consequence; but, however, that she would talk
with me, and let him know my answer, using at the same time some
arguments to persuade him not to desire it, and that it could be of no
service to him, seeing she hoped he had no desire to renew a
correspondence with me, and that on my account it was a kind of putting
my life in his hands.

He told her he had a great desire to see me, that he would give her any
assurances that were in his power, not to take any advantages of me,
and that in the first place he would give me a general release from all
demands of any kind.  She insisted how it might tend to a further
divulging the secret, and might in the end be injurious to him,
entreating him not to press for it; so at length  he desisted.

They had some discourse upon the subject of the things he had lost, and
he seemed to be very desirous of his gold watch, and told her if she
could procure that for him, he would willingly give as much for it as
it was worth.  She told him she would endeavour to procure it for him,
and leave the valuing it to himself.

Accordingly the next day she carried the watch, and he gave her thirty
guineas for it, which was more than I should have been able to make of
it, though it seems it cost much more.  He spoke something of his
periwig, which it seems cost him threescore guineas, and his snuff-box,
and in a few days more she carried them too; which obliged him very
much, and he gave her thirty more.  The next day I sent him his fine
sword and cane gratis, and demanded nothing of him, but I had no mind
to see him, unless it had been so that he might be satisfied I knew who
he was, which he was not willing to.

Then he entered into a long talk with her of the manner how she came to
know all this matter.  She formed a long tale of that part; how she had
it from one that I had told the whole story to, and that was to help me
dispose of the goods; and this confidante brought the things to her,
she being by profession a pawnbroker; and she hearing of his worship's
disaster, guessed at the thing in general; that having gotten the
things into her hands, she had resolved to come and try as she had
done.  She then gave him repeated assurances that it should never go
out of her mouth, and though she knew the woman very well, yet she had
not let her know, meaning me, anything of it; that is to say, who the
person was, which, by the way, was false; but, however, it was not to
his damage, for I never opened my mouth of it to anybody.

I had a great many thoughts in my head about my seeing him again, and
was often sorry that I had refused it.  I was persuaded that if I had
seen him, and let him know that I knew him, I should have made some
advantage of him, and perhaps have had some maintenance from him; and
though it was a life wicked enough, yet it was not so full of danger as
this I was engaged in.  However, those thoughts wore off, and I
declined seeing him again, for that time; but my governess saw him
often, and he was very kind to her, giving her something almost every
time he saw her.  One time in particular she found him very merry, and
as she thought he had some wine in his head, and he pressed her again
very earnestly to let him see that woman that, as he said, had
bewitched him so that night, my governess, who was from the beginning
for my seeing him, told him he was so desirous of it that she could
almost yield of it, if she could prevail upon me; adding that if he
would please to come to her house in the evening, she would endeavour
it, upon his repeated assurances of forgetting what was past.

Accordingly she came to me, and told me all the discourse; in short,
she soon biassed me to consent, in a case which I had some regret in my
mind for declining before; so I prepared to see him.  I dressed me to
all the advantage possible, I assure you, and for the first time used a
little art; I say for the first time, for I had never yielded to the
baseness of paint before, having always had vanity enough to believe I
had no need of it.

At the hour appointed he came; and as she observed before, so it was
plain still, that he had been drinking, though very far from what we
call being in drink.  He appeared exceeding pleased to see me, and
entered into a long discourse with me upon the old affair.  I begged
his pardon very often for my share of it, protested I had not any such
design when first I met him, that I had not gone out with him but that
I took him for a very civil gentleman, and that he made me so many
promises of offering no uncivility to me.

He alleged the wine he drank, and that he scarce knew what he did, and
that if it had not been so, I should never have let him take the
freedom with me that he had done.  He protested to me that he never
touched any woman but me since he was married to his wife, and it was a
surprise upon him; complimented me upon being so particularly agreeable
to him, and the like; and talked so much of that kind, till I found he
had talked himself almost into a temper to do the same thing over
again.  But I took him up short.  I protested I had never suffered any
man to touch me since my husband died, which was near eight years.  He
said he believed it to be so truly; and added that madam had intimated
as much to him, and that it was his opinion of that part which made his
desire to see me again; and that since he had once broke in upon his
virtue with me, and found no ill consequences, he could be safe in
venturing there again; and so, in short, it went on to what I expected,
and to what will not bear relating.

My old governess had foreseen it, as well as I, and therefore led him
into a room which had not a bed in it, and yet had a chamber within it
which had a bed, whither we withdrew for the rest of the night; and, in
short, after some time being together, he went to bed, and lay there
all night.  I withdrew, but came again undressed in the morning, before
it was day, and lay with him the rest of the time.

Thus, you see, having committed a crime once is a sad handle to the
committing of it again; whereas all the regret and reflections wear off
when the temptation renews itself.  Had I not yielded to see him again,
the corrupt desire in him had worn off, and 'tis very probable he had
never fallen into it with anybody else, as I really believe he had not
done before.

When he went away, I told him I hoped he was satisfied he had not been
robbed again.  He told me he was satisfied in that point, and could
trust me again, and putting his hand in his pocket, gave me five
guineas, which was the first money I had gained that way for many years.

I had several visits of the like kind from him, but he never came into
a settled way of maintenance, which was what I would have best pleased
with.  Once, indeed, he asked me how I did to live.  I answered him
pretty quick, that I assured him I had never taken that course that I
took with him, but that indeed I worked at my needle, and could just
maintain myself; that sometime it was as much as I was able to do, and
I shifted hard enough.

He seemed to reflect upon himself that he should be the first person to
lead me into that, which he assured me he never intended to do himself;
and it touched him a little, he said, that he should be the cause of
his own sin and mine too.  He would often make just reflections also
upon the crime itself, and upon the particular circumstances of it with
respect to himself; how wine introduced the inclinations how the devil
led him to the place, and found out an object to tempt him, and he made
the moral always himself.

When these thoughts were upon him he would go away, and perhaps not
come again in a month's time or longer; but then as the serious part
wore off, the lewd part would wear in, and then he came prepared for
the wicked part.  Thus we lived for some time; thought he did not keep,
as they call it, yet he never failed doing things that were handsome,
and sufficient to maintain me without working, and, which was better,
without following my old trade.

But this affair had its end too; for after about a year, I found that
he did not come so often as usual, and at last he left if off
altogether without any dislike to bidding adieu; and so there was an
end of that short scene of life, which added no great store to me, only
to make more work for repentance.

However, during this interval I confined myself pretty much at home; at
least, being thus provided for, I made no adventures, no, not for a
quarter of a year after he left me; but then finding the fund fail, and
being loth to spend upon the main stock, I began to think of my old
trade, and to look abroad into the street again; and my first step was
lucky enough.

I had dressed myself up in a very mean habit, for as I had several
shapes to appear in, I was now in an ordinary stuff-gown, a blue apron,
and a straw hat and I placed myself at the door of the Three Cups Inn
in St. John Street.  There were several carriers used the inn, and the
stage-coaches for Barnet, for Totteridge, and other towns that way
stood always in the street in the evening, when they prepared to set
out, so that I was ready for anything that offered, for either one or
other.  The meaning was this; people come frequently with bundles and
small parcels to those inns, and call for such carriers or coaches as
they want, to carry them into the country; and there generally attend
women, porters' wives or daughters, ready to take in such things for
their respective people that employ them.

It happened very oddly that I was standing at the inn gate, and a woman
that had stood there before, and which was the porter's wife belonging
to the Barnet stage-coach, having observed me, asked if I waited for
any of the coaches.  I told her Yes, I waited for my mistress, that was
coming to go to Barnet.  She asked me who was my mistress, and I told
her any madam's name that came next me; but as it seemed, I happened
upon a name, a family of which name lived at Hadley, just beyond Barnet.

I said no more to her, or she to me, a good while; but by and by,
somebody calling her at a door a little way off, she desired me that if
anybody called for the Barnet coach, I would step and call her at the
house, which it seems was an alehouse.  I said Yes, very readily, and
away she went.

She was no sooner gone but comes a wench and a child, puffing and
sweating, and asks for the Barnet coach.  I answered presently, 'Here.'
'Do you belong to the Barnet coach?' says she.  'Yes, sweetheart,' said
I; 'what do ye want?'  'I want room for two passengers,' says she.
'Where are they, sweetheart?' said I.  'Here's this girl, pray let her
go into the coach,' says she, 'and I'll go and fetch my mistress.'
'Make haste, then, sweetheart,' says I, 'for we may be full else.'  The
maid had a great bundle under her arm; so she put the child into the
coach, and I said, 'You had best put your bundle into the coach too.'
'No,' says she, 'I am afraid somebody should slip it away from the
child.'  'Give to me, then,' said I, 'and I'll take care of it.'  'Do,
then,' says she, 'and be sure you take of it.'  'I'll answer for it,'
said I, 'if it were for #20 value.'  'There, take it, then,' says she,
and away she goes.

As soon as I had got the bundle, and the maid was out of sight, I goes
on towards the alehouse, where the porter's wife was, so that if I had
met her, I had then only been going to give her the bundle, and to call
her to her business, as if I was going away, and could stay no longer;
but as I did not meet her, I walked away, and turning into Charterhouse
Lane, then crossed into Batholomew Close, so into Little Britain, and
through the Bluecoat Hospital, into Newgate Street.

To prevent my being known, I pulled off my blue apron, and wrapped the
bundle in it, which before was made up in a piece of painted calico,
and very remarkable; I also wrapped up my straw hat in it, and so put
the bundle upon my head; and it was very well that I did thus, for
coming through the Bluecoat Hospital, who should I meet but the wench
that had given me the bundle to hold.  It seems she was going with her
mistress, whom she had been gone to fetch, to the Barnet coaches.

I saw she was in haste, and I had no business to stop her; so away she
went, and I brought my bundle safe home to my governess.  There was no
money, nor plate, or jewels in the bundle, but a very good suit of
Indian damask, a gown and a petticoat, a laced-head and ruffles of very
good Flanders lace, and some linen and other things, such as I knew
very well the value of.

This was not indeed my own invention, but was given me by one that had
practised it with success, and my governess liked it extremely; and
indeed I tried it again several times, though never twice near the same
place; for the next time I tried it in White Chapel, just by the corner
of Petticoat Lane, where the coaches stand that go out to Stratford and
Bow, and that side of the country, and another time at the Flying
Horse, without Bishopgate, where the Cheston coaches then lay; and I
had always the good luck to come off with some booty.

Another time I placed myself at a warehouse by the waterside, where the
coasting vessels from the north come, such as from Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
Sunderland, and other places.  Here, the warehouses being shut, comes a
young fellow with a letter; and he wanted a box and a hamper that was
come from Newcastle-upon-Tyne.  I asked him if he had the marks of it;
so he shows me the letter, by virtue of which he was to ask for it, and
which gave an account of the contents, the box being full of linen, and
the hamper full of glass ware.  I read the letter, and took care to see
the name, and the marks, the name of the person that sent the goods,
the name of the person that they were sent to; then I bade the
messenger come in the morning, for that the warehouse-keeper would not
be there any more that night.

Away went I, and getting materials in a public house, I wrote a letter
from Mr. John Richardson of Newcastle to his dear cousin Jemmy Cole, in
London, with an account that he sent by such a vessel (for I remembered
all the particulars to a title), so many pieces of huckaback linen, so
many ells of Dutch holland and the like, in a box, and a hamper of
flint glasses from Mr. Henzill's glasshouse; and that the box was
marked I. C. No. 1, and the hamper was directed by a label on the
cording.

About an hour after, I came to the warehouse, found the
warehouse-keeper, and had the goods delivered me without any scruple;
the value of the linen being about #22.

I could fill up this whole discourse with the variety of such
adventures, which daily invention directed to, and which I managed with
the utmost dexterity, and always with success.

At length--as when does the pitcher come safe home that goes so very
often to the well?--I fell into some small broils, which though they
could not affect me fatally, yet made me known, which was the worst
thing next to being found guilty that could befall me.

I had taken up the disguise of a widow's dress; it was without any real
design in view, but only waiting for anything that might offer, as I
often did.  It happened that while I was going along the street in
Covent Garden, there was a great cry of 'Stop thief!  Stop thief!' some
artists had, it seems, put a trick upon a shopkeeper, and being
pursued, some of them fled one way, and some another; and one of them
was, they said, dressed up in widow's weeds, upon which the mob
gathered about me, and some said I was the person, others said no.
Immediately came the mercer's journeyman, and he swore aloud I was the
person, and so seized on me.  However, when I was brought back by the
mob to the mercer's shop, the master of the house said freely that I
was not the woman that was in his shop, and would have let me go
immediately; but another fellow said gravely, 'Pray stay till Mr. ----'
(meaning the journeyman) 'comes back, for he knows her.'  So they kept
me by force near half an hour.  They had called a constable, and he
stood in the shop as my jailer; and in talking with the constable I
inquired where he lived, and what trade he was; the man not
apprehending in the least what happened afterwards, readily told me his
name, and trade, and where he lived; and told me as a jest, that I
might be sure to hear of his name when I came to the Old Bailey.

Some of the servants likewise used me saucily, and had much ado to keep
their hands off me; the master indeed was civiller to me than they, but
he would not yet let me go, though he owned he could not say I was in
his shop before.

I began to be a little surly with him, and told him I hoped he would
not take it ill if I made myself amends upon him in a more legal way
another time; and desired I might send for friends to see me have right
done me.  No, he said, he could give no such liberty; I might ask it
when I came before the justice of peace; and seeing I threatened him,
he would take care of me in the meantime, and would lodge me safe in
Newgate.  I told him it was his time now, but it would be mine by and
by, and governed my passion as well as I was able.  However, I spoke to
the constable to call me a porter, which he did, and then I called for
pen, ink, and paper, but they would let me have none.  I asked the
porter his name, and where he lived, and the poor man told it me very
willingly.  I bade him observe and remember how I was treated there;
that he saw I was detained there by force.  I told him I should want
his evidence in another place, and it should not be the worse for him
to speak.  The porter said he would serve me with all his heart.  'But,
madam,' says he, 'let me hear them refuse to let you go, then I may be
able to speak the plainer.'

With that I spoke aloud to the master of the shop, and said, 'Sir, you
know in your own conscience that I am not the person you look for, and
that I was not in your shop before, therefore I demand that you detain
me here no longer, or tell me the reason of your stopping me.'  The
fellow grew surlier upon this than before, and said he would do neither
till he thought fit.  'Very well,' said I to the constable and to the
porter; 'you will be pleased to remember this, gentlemen, another
time.'  The porter said, 'Yes, madam'; and the constable began not to
like it, and would have persuaded the mercer to dismiss him, and let me
go, since, as he said, he owned I was not the person.  'Good, sir,'
says the mercer to him tauntingly, 'are you a justice of peace or a
constable?  I charged you with her; pray do you do your duty.'  The
constable told him, a little moved, but very handsomely, 'I know my
duty, and what I am, sir; I doubt you hardly know what you are doing.'
They had some other hard words, and in the meantime the journeyman,
impudent and unmanly to the last degree, used me barbarously, and one
of them, the same that first seized upon me, pretended he would search
me, and began to lay hands on me.  I spit in his face, called out to
the constable, and bade him to take notice of my usage.  'And pray, Mr.
Constable,' said I, 'ask that villain's name,' pointing to the man.
The constable reproved him decently, told him that he did not know what
he did, for he knew that his master acknowledged I was not the person
that was in his shop; 'and,' says the constable, 'I am afraid your
master is bringing himself, and me too, into trouble, if this
gentlewoman comes to prove who she is, and where she was, and it
appears that she is not the woman you pretend to.'  'Damn her,' says
the fellow again, with a impudent, hardened face, 'she is the lady, you
may depend upon it; I'll swear she is the same body that was in the
shop, and that I gave the pieces of satin that is lost into her own
hand.  You shall hear more of it when Mr. William and Mr. Anthony
(those  were other journeymen) come back; they will know her again as
well as I.'

Just as the insolent rogue was talking thus to the constable, comes
back Mr. William and Mr. Anthony, as he called them, and a great rabble
with them, bringing along with them the true widow that I was pretended
to be; and they came sweating and blowing into the shop, and with a
great deal of triumph, dragging the poor creature in the most butcherly
manner up towards their master, who was in the back shop, and cried out
aloud, 'Here's the widow, sir; we have catched her at last.' 'What do
ye mean by that?' says the master.  'Why, we have her already; there
she sits,' says he, 'and Mr. ----,' says he, 'can swear this is she.'
The other man, whom they called Mr. Anthony, replied, 'Mr. ---- may say
what he will, and swear what he will, but this is the woman, and
there's the remnant of satin she stole; I took it out of her clothes
with my own hand.'

I sat still now, and began to take a better heart, but smiled and said
nothing; the master looked pale; the constable turned about and looked
at me.  'Let 'em alone, Mr. Constable,' said I; 'let 'em go on.'  The
case was plain and could not be denied, so the constable was charged
with the right thief, and the mercer told me very civilly he was sorry
for the mistake, and hoped I would not take it ill; that they had so
many things of this nature put upon them every day, that they could not
be blamed for being very sharp in doing themselves justice.  'Not take
it ill, sir!' said I; 'how can I take it well!  If you had dismissed me
when your insolent fellow seized on me it the street, and brought me to
you, and when you yourself acknowledged I was not the person, I would
have put it by, and not taken it ill, because of the many ill things I
believe you have put upon you daily; but your treatment of me since has
been insufferable, and especially that of your servant; I must and will
have reparation for that.'

Then he began to parley with me, said he would make me any reasonable
satisfaction, and would fain have had me tell him what it was I
expected.  I told him that I should not be my own judge, the law should
decide it for me; and as I was to be carried before a magistrate, I
should let him hear there what I had to say.  He told me there was no
occasion to go before the justice now, I was at liberty to go where I
pleased; and so, calling to the constable, told him he might let me go,
for I was discharged.  The constable said calmly to him, 'sir, you
asked me just now if I knew whether I was a constable or justice, and
bade me do my duty, and charged me with this gentlewoman as a prisoner.
Now, sir, I find you do not understand what is my duty, for you would
make me a justice indeed; but I must tell you it is not in my power.  I
may keep a prisoner when I am charged with him, but 'tis the law and
the magistrate alone that can discharge that prisoner; therefore 'tis a
mistake, sir; I must carry her before a justice now, whether you think
well of it or not.'  The mercer was very high with the constable at
first; but the constable happening to be not a hired officer, but a
good, substantial kind of man (I think he was a corn-handler), and a
man of good sense, stood to his business, would not discharge me
without going to a justice of the peace; and I insisted upon it too.
When the mercer saw that, 'Well,' says he to the constable, 'you may
carry her where you please; I have nothing to say to her.' 'But, sir,'
says the constable, 'you will go with us, I hope, for 'tis you that
charged me with her.'  'No, not I,' says the mercer; 'I tell you I have
nothing to say to her.'  'But pray, sir, do,' says the constable; 'I
desire it of you for your own sake, for the justice  can do nothing
without you.'  'Prithee, fellow,' says the mercer, 'go about your
business; I tell you I have nothing to say to the gentlewoman.  I
charge you in the king's name to dismiss her.'  'Sir,' says the
constable, 'I find you don't know what it is to be constable; I beg of
you don't oblige me to be rude to you.'  'I think I need not; you are
rude enough already,' says the mercer.  'No, sir,' says the constable,
'I am not rude; you have broken the peace in bringing an honest woman
out of the street, when she was about her lawful occasion, confining
her in your shop, and ill-using her here by your servants; and now can
you say I am rude to you?  I think I am civil to you in not commanding
or charging you in the king's name to go with me, and charging every
man I see that passes your door to aid and assist me in carrying you by
force; this you cannot but know I have power to do, and yet I forbear
it, and once more entreat you to go with me.'  Well, he would not for
all this, and gave the constable ill language.  However, the constable
kept his temper, and would not be provoked; and then I put in and said,
'Come, Mr. Constable, let him alone; I shall find ways enough to fetch
him before a magistrate, I don't fear that; but there's the fellow,'
says I, 'he was the man that seized on me as I was innocently going
along the street, and you are a witness of the violence with me since;
give me leave to charge you with him, and carry him before the
justice.'  'Yes, madam,' says the constable; and turning to the fellow
'Come, young gentleman,' says he to the journeyman, 'you must go along
with us; I hope you are not above the constable's power, though your
master is.'

The fellow looked like a condemned thief, and hung back, then looked at
his master, as if he could help him; and he, like a fool, encourage the
fellow to be rude, and he truly resisted the constable, and pushed him
back with a good force when he went to lay hold on him, at which the
constable knocked him down, and called out for help; and immediately
the shop was filled with people, and the constable seized the master
and man, and all his servants.

This first ill consequence of this fray was, that the woman they had
taken, who was really the thief, made off, and got clear away in the
crowd; and two other that they had stopped also; whether they were
really guilty or not, that I can say nothing to.

By this time some of his neighbours having come in, and, upon inquiry,
seeing how things went, had endeavoured to bring the hot-brained mercer
to his senses, and he began to be convinced that he was in the wrong;
and so at length we went all very quietly before the justice, with a
mob of about five hundred people at our heels; and all the way I went I
could hear the people ask what was the matter, and other reply and say,
a mercer had stopped a gentlewoman instead of a thief, and had
afterwards taken the thief, and now the gentlewoman had taken the
mercer, and was carrying him before the justice.  This pleased the
people strangely, and made the crowd increase, and they cried out as
they went, 'Which is the rogue?  which is the mercer?'  and  especially
the women.  Then when they saw him they cried out, 'That's he, that's
he'; and every now and then came a good dab of dirt at him; and thus we
marched a good while, till the mercer thought fit to desire the
constable to call a coach to protect himself from the rabble; so we
rode the rest of the way, the constable and I, and the mercer and his
man.

When we came to the justice, which was an ancient gentleman in
Bloomsbury, the constable giving first a summary account of the matter,
the justice bade me speak, and tell what I had to say.  And first he
asked my name, which I was very loth to give, but there was no remedy,
so I told him my name was Mary Flanders, that I was a widow, my husband
being a sea captain, died on a voyage to Virginia; and some other
circumstances I told which he could never contradict, and that I lodged
at present in town with such a person, naming my governess; but that I
was preparing to go over to America, where my husband's effects lay,
and that I was going that day to buy some clothes to put myself into
second mourning, but had not yet been in any shop, when that fellow,
pointing to the mercer's journeyman, came rushing upon me with such
fury as very much frighted me, and carried me back to his master's
shop, where, though his master acknowledged I was not the person, yet
he would not dismiss me, but charged a constable with me.

Then I proceeded to tell how the journeyman treated me; how they would
not suffer me to send for any of my friends; how afterwards they found
the real thief, and took the very goods they had lost upon her, and all
the particulars as before.

Then the constable related his case:  his dialogue with the mercer
about discharging me, and at last his servant's refusing to go with
him, when he had charged him with him, and his master encouraging him
to do so, and at last his striking the constable, and the like, all as
I have told it already.

The justice then heard the mercer and his man.  The mercer indeed made
a long harangue of the great loss they have daily by lifters and
thieves; that it was easy for them to mistake, and that when he found
it he would have dismissed me, etc., as above.  As to the journeyman,
he had very little to say, but that he pretended other of the servants
told him that I was really the person.

Upon the whole, the justice first of all told me very courteously I was
discharged; that he was very sorry that the mercer's man should in his
eager pursuit have so little discretion as to take up an innocent
person for a guilty person; that if he had not been so unjust as to
detain me afterward, he believed I would have forgiven the first
affront; that, however, it was not in his power to award me any
reparation for anything, other than by openly reproving them, which he
should do; but he supposed I would apply to such methods as the law
directed; in the meantime he would bind him over.

But as to the breach of the peace committed by the journeyman, he told
me he should give me some satisfaction for that, for he should commit
him to Newgate for assaulting the constable, and for assaulting me also.

Accordingly he sent the fellow to Newgate for that assault, and his
master gave bail, and so we came away; but I had the satisfaction of
seeing the mob wait upon them both, as they came out, hallooing and
throwing stones and dirt at the coaches they rode in; and so I came
home to my governess.

After this hustle, coming home and telling my governess the story, she
falls a-laughing at me.  'Why are you merry?' says I; 'the story has
not so much laughing room in it as you imagine; I am sure I have had a
great deal of hurry and fright too, with a pack of ugly rogues.'
'Laugh!' says my governess; 'I laugh, child, to see what a lucky
creature you are; why, this job will be the best bargain to you that
ever you made in your life, if you manage it well.  I warrant you,'
says she, 'you shall make the mercer pay you #500 for damages, besides
what you shall get out of the journeyman.'

I had other thoughts of the matter than she had; and especially,
because I had given in my name to the justice of peace; and I knew that
my name was so well known among the people at Hick's Hall, the Old
Bailey, and such places, that if this cause came to be tried openly,
and my name came to be inquired into, no court would give much damages,
for the reputation of a person of such a character.  However, I was
obliged to begin a prosecution in form, and accordingly my governess
found me out a very creditable sort of a man to manage it, being an
attorney of very good business, and of a good reputation, and she was
certainly in the right of this; for had she employed a pettifogging
hedge solicitor, or a man not known, and not in good reputation, I
should have brought it to but little.

I met this attorney, and gave him all the particulars at large, as they
are recited above; and he assured me it was a case, as he said, that
would very well support itself, and that he did not question but that a
jury would give very considerable damages on such an occasion; so
taking his full instructions he began the prosecution, and the mercer
being arrested, gave bail.  A few days after his giving bail, he comes
with his attorney to my attorney, to let him know that he desired to
accommodate the matter; that it was all carried on in the heat of an
unhappy passion; that his client, meaning me, had a sharp provoking
tongue, that I used them ill, gibing at them, and jeering them, even
while they believed me to be the very person, and that I had provoked
them, and the like.

My attorney managed as well on my side; made them believe
 I was a widow of fortune, that I was able to do myself justice,
and had great friends to stand by me too, who had all made me promise
to sue to the utmost, and that if it cost me a thousand pounds I would
be sure to have satisfaction, for that the affronts I had received were
insufferable.

However, they brought my attorney to this, that he promised he would
not blow the coals, that if I inclined to accommodation, he would not
hinder me, and that he would rather persuade me to peace than to war;
for which they told him he should be no loser; all which he told me
very honestly, and told me that if they offered him any bribe, I should
certainly know it; but upon the whole he told me very honestly that if
I would take his opinion, he would advise me to make it up with them,
for that as they were in a great fright, and were desirous above all
things to make it up, and knew that, let it be what it would, they
would be allotted to bear all the costs of the suit; he believed they
would give me freely more than any jury or court of justice would give
upon a trial.  I asked him what he thought they would be brought to.
He told me he could not tell as to that, but he would tell me more when
I saw him again.

Some time after this, they came again to know if he had talked with me.
He told them he had; that he found me not so averse to an accommodation
as some of my friends were, who resented the disgrace offered me, and
set me on; that they blowed the coals in secret, prompting me to
revenge, or do myself justice, as they called it; so that he could not
tell what to say to it; he told them he would do his endeavour to
persuade me, but he ought to be able to tell me what proposal they
made.  They pretended they could not make any proposal, because it
might be made use of against them; and he told them, that by the same
rule he could not make any offers, for that might be pleaded in
abatement of what damages a jury might be inclined to give.  However,
after some discourse and mutual promises that no advantage should be
taken on either side, by what was transacted then or at any other of
those meetings, they came to a kind of a treaty; but so remote, and so
wide from one another, that nothing could be expected from it; for my
attorney demanded #500 and charges, and they offered #50 without
charges; so they broke off, and the mercer proposed to have a meeting
with me myself; and my attorney agreed to that very readily.

My attorney gave me notice to come to this meeting in good clothes, and
with some state, that the mercer might see I was something more than I
seemed to be that time they had me.  Accordingly I came in a new suit
of second mourning, according to what I had said at the justice's.  I
set myself out, too, as well as a widow's dress in second mourning
would admit; my governess also furnished me with a good pearl necklace,
that shut in behind with a locket of diamonds, which she had in pawn;
and I had a very good figure; and as I stayed till I was sure they were
come, I came in a coach to the door, with my maid with me.

When I came into the room the mercer was surprised.  He stood up and
made his bow, which I took a little notice of, and but a little, and
went and sat down where my own attorney had pointed to me to sit, for
it was his house.  After a little while the mercer said, he did not
know me again, and began to make some compliments his way.  I told him,
I believed he did not know me at first, and that if he had, I believed
he would not have treated me as he did.

He told me he was very sorry for what had happened, and that it was to
testify the willingness he had to make all possible reparation that he
had appointed this meeting; that he hoped I would not carry things to
extremity, which might be not only too great a loss to him, but might
be the ruin of his business and shop, in which case I might have the
satisfaction of repaying an injury with an injury ten times greater;
but that I would then get nothing, whereas he was willing to do me any
justice that was in his power, without putting himself or me to the
trouble or charge of a suit at law.

I told him I was glad to hear him talk so much more like a man of sense
than he did before; that it was true, acknowledgment in most cases of
affronts was counted reparation sufficient; but this had gone too far
to be made up so; that I was not revengeful, nor did I seek his ruin,
or any man's else, but that all my friends were unanimous not to let me
so far neglect my character as to adjust a thing of this kind without a
sufficient reparation of honour; that to be taken up for a thief was
such an indignity as could not be put up; that my character was above
being treated so by any that knew me, but because in my condition of a
widow I had been for some time careless of  myself, and negligent of
myself, I might be taken for such a creature, but that for the
particular usage I had from him afterwards,--and then I repeated all as
before; it was so provoking I had scarce patience to repeat it.

Well, he acknowledged all, and was might humble indeed; he made
proposals very handsome; he came up to #100 and to pay all the law
charges, and added that he would make me a present of a very good suit
of clothes.  I came down to #300, and I demanded that I should publish
an advertisement of the particulars in the common newspapers.

This was a clause he never could comply with.  However, at last he came
up, by good management of my attorney, to #150 and a suit of black silk
clothes; and there I agree, and as it were, at my attorney's request,
complied with it, he paying my attorney's bill and charges, and gave us
a good supper into the bargain.


When I came to receive the money, I brought my governess with me,
dressed like an old duchess, and a gentleman very well dressed, who we
pretended courted me, but I called him cousin, and the lawyer was only
to hint privately to him that his gentleman courted the widow.

He treated us handsomely indeed, and paid the money cheerfully enough;
so that it cost him #200 in all, or rather more.  At our last meeting,
when all was agreed, the case of the journeyman came up, and the mercer
begged very hard for him; told me he was a man that had kept a shop of
his own, and been in good business, had a wife, and several children,
and was very poor; that he had nothing to make satisfaction with, but
he should come to beg my pardon on his knees, if I desired it, as
openly as I pleased.  I had no spleen at the saucy rogue, nor were his
submissions anything to me, since there was nothing to be got by him,
so I thought it was as good to throw that in generously as not; so I
told him I did not desire the ruin of any man, and therefore at his
request I would forgive the wretch; it was below me to seek any revenge.

When we were at supper he brought the poor fellow in to make
acknowledgment, which he would have done with as much mean humility as
his offence was with insulting haughtiness and pride, in which he was
an instance of a complete baseness of spirit, impious, cruel, and
relentless when uppermost and in prosperity, abject and low-spirited
when down in affliction.  However, I abated his cringes, told him I
forgave him, and desired he might withdraw, as if I did not care for
the sight of him, though I had forgiven him.

I was now in good circumstances indeed, if I could have known my time
for leaving off, and my governess often said I was the richest of the
trade in England; and so I believe I was, for I had #700 by me in
money, besides clothes, rings, some plate, and two gold watches, and
all of them stolen, for I had innumerable jobs besides these I have
mentioned.  Oh!  had I even now had the grace of  repentance, I had
still leisure to have looked back upon my follies, and have made some
reparation; but the satisfaction I was to make for the public mischiefs
I had done was yet left behind; and I could not forbear going abroad
again, as I called it now, than any more I could when my extremity
really drove me out for bread.

It was not long after the affair with the mercer was made up, that I
went out in an equipage quite different from any I had ever appeared in
before.  I dressed myself like a beggar woman, in the coarsest and most
despicable rags I could get, and I walked about peering and peeping
into every door and window I came near; and indeed I was in such a
plight now that I knew as ill how to behave in as ever I did in any.  I
naturally abhorred dirt and rags; I had been bred up tight and cleanly,
and could be no other, whatever condition I was in; so that this was
the most uneasy disguise to me that ever I put on.  I said presently to
myself that this would not do, for this was a dress that everybody was
shy and afraid of; and I thought everybody looked at me, as if they
were afraid I should come near them, lest I should take something from
them, or afraid to come near me, lest they should get something from
me.  I wandered about all the evening the first time I went out, and
made nothing of it, but came home again wet, draggled, and tired.
However, I went out again the next night, and then I met with a little
adventure, which had like to have cost me dear.  As I was standing near
a tavern door, there comes a gentleman on horseback, and lights at the
door, and wanting to go into the tavern, he calls one of the drawers to
hold his horse.  He stayed pretty long in the tavern, and the drawer
heard his master call, and thought he would be angry with him.  Seeing
me stand by him, he called to me, 'Here, woman,' says he, 'hold this
horse a while, till I go in; if the gentleman comes, he'll give you
something.'  'Yes,' says I, and takes the horse, and walks off with him
very soberly, and carried him to my governess.

This had been a booty to those that had understood it; but never was
poor thief more at a loss to know what to do with anything that was
stolen; for when I came home, my governess was quite confounded, and
what to do with the creature, we neither of us knew.  To send him to a
stable was doing nothing, for it was certain that public notice would
be given in the Gazette, and the horse described, so that we durst not
go to fetch it again.

All the remedy we had for this unlucky adventure was to go and set up
the horse at an inn, and send a note by a porter to the tavern, that
the gentleman's horse that was lost such a time was left at such an
inn, and that he might be had there; that the poor woman that held him,
having led him about the street, not being able to lead him back again,
had left him there.  We might have waited till the owner had published
and offered a reward, but we did not care to venture the receiving the
reward.

So this was a robbery and no robbery, for little was lost by it, and
nothing was got by it, and I was quite sick of going out in a beggar's
dress; it did not answer at all, and besides, I thought it was ominous
and threatening.

While I was in this disguise, I fell in with a parcel of folks of a
worse kind than any I ever sorted with, and I saw a little into their
ways too.  These were coiners of money, and they made some very good
offers to me, as to profit; but the part they would have had me have
embarked in was the most dangerous part.  I mean that of the very
working the die, as they call it, which, had I been taken, had been
certain death, and that at a stake--I say, to be burnt to death at a
stake; so that though I was to appearance but a beggar, and they
promised mountains of gold and silver to me to engage, yet it would not
do.  It is true, if I had been really a beggar, or had been desperate
as when I began, I might perhaps have closed with it; for what care
they to die that can't tell how to live?  But at present this was not
my condition, at least I was for no such terrible risks as those;
besides, the very thoughts of being burnt at a stake struck terror into
my very soul, chilled my blood, and gave me the vapours to such a
degree, as I could not think of it without trembling.

This put an end to my disguise too, for as I did not like the proposal,
so I did not tell them so, but seemed to relish it, and promised to
meet again.  But I durst see them no more; for if I had seen them, and
not complied, though I had declined it with the greatest assurance of
secrecy in the world, they would have gone near to have murdered me, to
make sure work, and make themselves easy, as they call it.  What kind
of easiness that is, they may best judge that understand how easy men
are that can murder people to prevent danger.

This and horse-stealing were things quite out of my way, and I might
easily resolve I would have to more to say to them; my business seemed
to lie another way, and though it had hazard enough in it too, yet it
was more suitable to me, and what had more of art in it, and more room
to escape, and more chances for a-coming off if a surprise should
happen.

I had several proposals made also to me about that time, to come into a
gang of house-breakers; but that was a thing I had no mind to venture
at neither, any more than I had at the coining trade.  I offered to go
along with two men and a woman, that made it their business to get into
houses by stratagem, and with them I was willing enough to venture.
But there were three of them already, and they did not care to part,
nor I to have too many in a gang, so I did not close with them, but
declined them, and they paid dear for their next attempt.

But at length I met with a woman that had often told me what adventures
she had made, and with success, at the waterside, and I closed with
her, and we drove on our business pretty well.  One day we came among
some Dutch people at St.  Catherine's, where we went on pretence to buy
goods that were privately got on shore.  I was two or three times in a
house where we saw a good quantity of prohibited goods, and my
companion once brought away three pieces of Dutch black silk that
turned to good account, and I had my share of it; but in all the
journeys I made by myself, I could not get an opportunity to do
anything, so I laid it aside, for I had been so often, that they began
to suspect something, and were so shy, that I saw nothing was to be
done.

This baulked me a little, and I resolved to push at something or other,
for I was not used to come back so often without purchase; so the next
day I dressed myself up fine, and took a walk to the other end of the
town.  I passed through the Exchange in the Strand, but had no notion
of finding anything to do there, when on a sudden I saw a great
cluttering in the place, and all the people, shopkeepers as well as
others, standing up and staring; and what should it be but some great
duchess come into the Exchange, and they said the queen was coming.  I
set myself close up to a shop-side with my back to the counter, as if
to let the crowd pass by, when keeping my eye upon a parcel of lace
which the shopkeeper was showing to some ladies that stood by me, the
shopkeeper and her maid were so taken up with looking to see who was
coming, and what shop they would go to, that I found means to slip a
paper of lace into my pocket and come clear off with it; so the
lady-milliner paid dear enough for her gaping after the queen.

I went off from the shop, as if driven along by the throng, and
mingling myself with the crowd, went out at the other door of the
Exchange, and so got away before they missed their lace; and because I
would not be followed, I called a coach and shut myself up in it.  I
had scarce shut the coach doors up, but I saw the milliner's maid and
five or six more come running out into the street, and crying out as if
they were frightened.  They did not cry 'Stop thief!' because nobody
ran away, but I could hear the word 'robbed,' and 'lace,' two or three
times, and saw the wench wringing her hands, and run staring to and
again, like one scared.  The coachman that had taken me up was getting
up into the box, but was not quite up, so that the horse had not begun
to move; so that I was terrible uneasy, and I took the packet of lace
and laid it ready to have dropped it out at the flap of the coach,
which opens before, just behind the coachman; but to my great
satisfaction, in less than a minute the coach began to move, that is to
say, as soon as the coachman had got up and spoken to his horses; so he
drove away without any interruption, and I brought off my purchase,
which was work near #20.

The next day I dressed up again, but in quite different clothes, and
walked the same way again, but nothing offered till I came into St.
James's Park, where I saw abundance of fine ladies in the Park, walking
in the Mall, and among the rest there was a little miss, a young lady
of about twelve or thirteen years old, and she had a sister, as I
suppose it was, with her, that might be about nine years old.  I
observed the biggest had a fine gold watch on, and a good necklace of
pearl, and they had a footman in livery with them; but as it is not
usual for the footman to go behind the ladies in the Mall, so I
observed the footman stopped at their going into the Mall, and the
biggest of the sisters spoke to him, which I perceived was to bid him
be just there when they came back.

When I heard her dismiss the footman, I stepped up to him and asked
him, what little lady that was? and held a little chat with him about
what a pretty child it was with her, and how genteel and well-carriaged
the lady, the eldest, would be:  how womanish, and how grave; and the
fool of a fellow told me presently who she was; that she was Sir Thomas
----'s eldest daughter, of Essex, and that she was a great fortune;
that her mother was not come to town yet; but she was with Sir William
----'s lady, of Suffolk, at her lodging in Suffolk Street, and a great
deal more; that they had a maid and a woman to wait on them, besides
Sir Thomas's coach, the coachman, and himself; and that young lady was
governess to the whole family, as well here as at home too; and, in
short, told me abundance of things enough for my business.

I was very well dressed, and had my gold watch as well as she; so I
left the footman, and I puts myself in a rank with this young lady,
having stayed till she had taken one double turn in the Mall, and was
going forward again; by and by I saluted her by her name, with the
title of Lady Betty.  I asked her when she heard from her father; when
my lady her mother would be in town, and how she did.

I talked so familiarly to her of her whole family that she could not
suspect but that I knew them all intimately.  I asked her why she would
come abroad without Mrs. Chime with her (that was the name of her
woman) to take of Mrs. Judith, that was her sister.  Then I entered
into a long chat with her about her sister, what a fine little lady she
was, and asked her if she had learned French, and a thousand such
little things to entertain her, when on a sudden we saw the guards
come, and the crowd ran to see the king go by to the Parliament House.

The ladies ran all to the side of the Mall, and I helped my lady to
stand upon the edge of the boards on the side of the Mall, that she
might be high enough to see; and took the little one and lifted her
quite up; during which, I took care to convey the gold watch so clean
away from the Lady Betty, that she never felt it, nor missed it, till
all the crowd was gone, and she was gotten into the middle of the Mall
among the other ladies.

I took my leave of her in the very crowd, and said to her, as if in
haste, 'Dear Lady Betty, take care of your little sister.' And so the
crowd did as it were thrust me away from her, and that I was obliged
unwillingly to take my leave.

The hurry in such cases is immediately over, and the place clear as
soon as the king is gone by; but as there is always a great running and
clutter just as the king passes, so having dropped the two little
ladies, and done my business with them without any miscarriage, I kept
hurrying on among the crowd, as if I ran to see the king, and so I got
before the crowd and kept so till I came to the end of the Mall, when
the king going on towards the Horse Guards, I went forward to the
passage, which went then through against the lower end of the
Haymarket, and there I bestowed a coach upon myself, and made off, and
I confess I have not yet been so good as my word, viz. to go and visit
my Lady Betty.

I was once of the mind to venture staying with Lady Betty till she
missed the watch, and so have made a great outcry about it with her,
and have got her into the coach, and put myself in the coach with her,
and have gone home with her; for she appeared so fond of me, and so
perfectly deceived by my so readily talking to her of all her relations
and family, that I thought it was very easy to push the thing farther,
and to have got at least the necklace of pearl; but when I considered
that though the child would not perhaps have suspected me, other people
might, and that if I was searched I should be discovered, I thought it
was best to go off with what I had got, and be satisfied.

I came accidentally afterwards to hear, that when the young lady missed
her watch, she made a great outcry in the Park, and sent her footman up
and down to see if he could find me out, she having described me so
perfectly that he knew presently that it was the same person that had
stood and talked so long with him, and asked him so many questions
about them; but I gone far enough out of their reach before she could
come at her footman to tell him the story.

I made another adventure after this, of a nature different from all I
had been concerned in yet, and this was at a gaming-house near Covent
Garden.

I saw several people go in and out; and I stood in the passage a good
while with another woman with me, and seeing a gentleman go up that
seemed to be of more than ordinary fashion, I said to him, 'Sir, pray
don't they give women leave to go up?' 'Yes, madam,' says he, 'and to
play too, if they please.'  'I mean so, sir,' said I.  And with that he
said he would introduce me if I had a mind; so I followed him to the
door, and he looking in, 'There, madam,' says he, 'are the gamesters,
if you have a mind to venture.'  I looked in and said to my comrade
aloud, 'Here's nothing but men; I won't venture among them.'  At which
one of the gentlemen cried out, 'You need not be afraid, madam, here's
none but fair gamesters; you are very welcome to come and set what you
please.'  so I went a little nearer and looked on, and some of them
brought me a chair, and I sat down and saw the box and dice go round
apace; then I said to my comrade, 'The gentlemen play too high for us;
come, let us go.'

The people were all very civil, and one gentleman in particular
encouraged me, and said, 'Come, madam, if you please to venture, if you
dare trust me, I'll answer for it you shall have nothing put upon you
here.'  'No, sir,' said I, smiling, 'I hope the gentlemen would not
cheat a woman.'  But still I declined venturing, though I pulled out a
purse with money in it, that they might see I did not want money.

After I had sat a while, one gentleman said to me, jeering, 'Come,
madam, I see you are afraid to venture for yourself; I always had good
luck with the ladies, you shall set for me, if you won't set for
yourself.'  I told him, 'sir, I should be very loth to lose your
money,' though I added, 'I am pretty lucky too; but the gentlemen play
so high, that I dare not indeed venture my own.'

'Well, well,' says he, 'there's ten guineas, madam; set them for me.'
so I took his money and set, himself looking on.  I ran out nine of the
guineas by one and two at a time, and then the box coming to the next
man to me, my gentleman gave me ten guineas more, and made me set five
of them at once, and the gentleman who had the box threw out, so there
was five guineas of his money again.  He was encouraged at this, and
made me take the box, which was a bold venture.  However, I held the
box so long that I had gained him his whole money, and had a good
handful of guineas in my lap, and which was the better luck, when I
threw out, I threw but at one or two of those that had set me, and so
went off easy.

When I was come this length, I offered the gentleman all the gold, for
it was his own; and so would have had him play for himself, pretending
I did not understand the game well enough.  He laughed, and said if I
had but good luck, it was no matter whether I understood the game or
no; but I should not leave off.  However, he took out the fifteen
guineas that he had put in at first, and bade me play with the rest.  I
would have told them to see how much I had got, but he said, 'No, no,
don't tell them, I believe you are very honest, and 'tis bad luck to
tell them'; so I played on.

I understood the game well enough, though I pretended I did not, and
played cautiously.  It was to keep a good stock in my lap, out of which
I every now and then conveyed some into my pocket, but in such a
manner, and at such convenient times, as I was sure he could not see it.

I played a great while, and had very good luck for him; but the last
time I held the box, they set me high, and I threw boldly at all; I
held the box till I gained near fourscore guineas, but lost above half
of it back in the last throw; so I got up, for I was afraid I should
lose it all back again, and said to him, 'Pray come, sir, now, and take
it and play for yourself; I think I have done pretty well for you.'  He
would have had me play on, but it grew late, and I desired to be
excused.  When I gave it up to him, I told him I hoped he would give me
leave to tell it now, that I might see what I had gained, and how lucky
I had been for him; when I told them, there were threescore and three
guineas.  'Ay,' says I, 'if it had not been for that unlucky throw, I
had got you a hundred guineas.'  So I gave him all the money, but he
would not take it till I had put my hand into it, and taken some for
myself, and bid me please myself.  I refused it, and was positive I
would not take it myself; if he had a mind to anything of that kind, it
should be all his own doings.

The rest of the gentlemen seeing us striving cried, 'Give it her all';
but I absolutely refused that.  Then one of them said, 'D--n ye, jack,
halve it with her; don't you know you should be always upon even terms
with the ladies.'  So, in short, he divided it with me, and I brought
away thirty guineas, besides about forty-three which I had stole
privately, which I was sorry for afterward, because he was so generous.

Thus I brought home seventy-three guineas, and let my old governess see
what good luck I had at play.  However, it was her advice that I should
not venture again, and I took her counsel, for I never went there any
more; for I knew as well as she, if the itch of play came in, I might
soon lose that, and all the rest of what I had got.

Fortune had smiled upon me to that degree, and I had thriven so much,
and my governess too, for she always had a share with me, that really
the old gentlewoman began to talk of leaving off while we were well,
and being satisfied with what we had got; but, I know not what fate
guided me, I was as backward to it now as she was when I proposed it to
her before, and so in an ill hour we gave over the thoughts of it for
the present, and, in a word, I grew more hardened and audacious than
ever, and the success I had made my name as famous as any thief of my
sort ever had been at Newgate, and in the Old Bailey.

I had sometime taken the liberty to play the same game over again,
which is not according to practice, which however succeeded not amiss;
but generally I took up new figures, and contrived to appear in new
shapes every time I went abroad.

It was not a rumbling time of the year, and the gentlemen being most of
them gone out of town, Tunbridge, and Epsom, and such places were full
of people.  But the city was thin, and I thought our trade felt it a
little, as well as other; so that at the latter end of the year I
joined myself with a gang who usually go every year to Stourbridge
Fair, and from thence to Bury Fair, in Suffolk.  We promised ourselves
great things there, but when I came to see how things were, I was weary
of it presently; for except mere picking of pockets, there was little
worth meddling with; neither, if a booty had been made, was it so easy
carrying it off, nor was there such a variety of occasion for business
in our way, as in London; all that I made of the whole journey was a
gold watch at Bury Fair, and a small parcel of linen at Cambridge,
which gave me an occasion to take leave of the place.  It was on old
bite, and I thought might do with a country shopkeeper, though in
London it would not.

I bought at a linen-draper's shop, not in the fair, but in the town of
Cambridge, as much fine holland and other things as came to about seven
pounds; when I had done, I bade them be sent to such an inn, where I
had purposely taken up my being the same morning, as if I was to lodge
there that night.

I ordered the draper to send them home to me, about such an hour, to
the inn where I lay, and I would pay him his money.  At the time
appointed the draper sends the goods, and I placed one of our gang at
the chamber door, and when the innkeeper's maid brought the messenger
to the door, who was a young fellow, an apprentice, almost a man, she
tells him her mistress was asleep, but if he would leave the things and
call in about an hour, I should be awake, and he might have the money.
He left the parcel very readily, and goes his way, and in about half an
hour my maid and I walked off, and that very evening I hired a horse,
and a man to ride before me, and went to Newmarket, and from thence got
my passage in a coach that was not quite full to St. Edmund's Bury,
where, as I told you, I could make but little of my trade, only at a
little country opera-house made a shift to carry off a gold watch from
a lady's side, who was not only intolerably merry, but, as I thought, a
little fuddled, which made my work much easier.

I made off with this little booty to Ipswich, and from thence to
Harwich, where I went into an inn, as if I had newly arrived from
Holland, not doubting but I should make some purchase among the
foreigners that came on shore there; but I found them generally empty
of things of value, except what was in their portmanteaux and Dutch
hampers, which were generally guarded by footmen; however, I fairly got
one of their portmanteaux one evening out of the chamber where the
gentleman lay, the footman being fast asleep on the bed, and I suppose
very drunk.

The room in which I lodged lay next to the Dutchman's, and having
dragged the heavy thing with much ado out of the chamber into mine, I
went out into the street, to see if I could find any possibility of
carrying it off.  I walked about a great while, but could see no
probability either of getting out the thing, or of conveying away the
goods that were in it if I had opened it, the town being so small, and
I a perfect stranger in it; so I was returning with a resolution to
carry it back again, and leave it where I found it.  Just in that very
moment I heard a man make a noise to some people to make haste, for the
boat was going to put off, and the tide would be spent.  I called to
the fellow, 'What boat is it, friend,' says I, 'that you belong to?'
'The Ipswich wherry, madam,' says he.  'When do you go off?' says I.
'This moment, madam,' says he; 'do you want to go thither?'  'Yes,'
said I, 'if you can stay till I fetch my things.' 'Where are your
things, madam?' says he.  'At such an inn,' said I.  'Well, I'll go
with you, madam,' says he, very civilly, 'and bring them for you.'
'Come away, then,' says I, and takes him with me.

The people of the inn were in a great hurry, the packet-boat from
Holland being just come in, and two coaches just come also with
passengers from London, for another packet-boat that was going off for
Holland, which coaches were to go back next day with the passengers
that were just landed.  In this hurry it was not much minded that I
came to the bar and paid my reckoning, telling my landlady I had gotten
my passage by sea in a wherry.

These wherries are large vessels, with good accommodation for carrying
passengers from Harwich to London; and though they are called wherries,
which is a word used in the Thames for a small boat rowed with one or
two men, yet these are vessels able to carry twenty passengers, and ten
or fifteen tons of goods, and fitted to bear the sea.  All this I had
found out by inquiring the night before into the several ways of going
to London.

My landlady was very courteous, took my money for my reckoning, but was
called away, all the house being in a hurry.  So I left her, took the
fellow up to my chamber, gave him the trunk, or portmanteau, for it was
like a trunk, and wrapped it about with an old apron, and he went
directly to his boat with it, and I after him, nobody asking us the
least question about it; as for the drunken Dutch footman he was still
asleep, and his master with other foreign gentlemen at supper, and very
merry below, so I went clean off with it to Ipswich; and going in the
night, the people of the house knew nothing but that I was gone to
London by the Harwich wherry, as I had told my landlady.

I was plagued at Ipswich with the custom-house officers, who stopped my
trunk, as I called it, and would open and search it.  I was willing, I
told them, they should search it, but husband had the key, and he was
not yet come from Harwich; this I said, that if upon searching it they
should find all the things be such as properly belonged to a man rather
than a woman, it should not seem strange to them.  However, they being
positive to open the trunk I consented to have it be broken open, that
is to say, to have the lock taken off, which was not difficult.

They found nothing for their turn, for the trunk had been searched
before, but they discovered several things very much to my
satisfaction, as particularly a parcel of money in French pistols, and
some Dutch ducatoons or rix-dollars, and the rest was chiefly two
periwigs, wearing-linen, and razors, wash-balls, perfumes, and other
useful things necessary for a gentleman, which all passed for my
husband's, and so I was quit to them.

It was now very early in the morning, and not light, and I knew not
well what course to take; for I made no doubt but I should be pursued
in the morning, and perhaps be taken with the things about me; so I
resolved upon taking new measures.  I went publicly to an inn in the
town with my trunk, as I called it, and having taken the substance out,
I did not think the lumber of it worth my concern; however, I gave it
the landlady of the house with a charge to take great care of it, and
lay it up safe till I should come again, and away I walked in to the
street.

When I was got into the town a great way from the inn, I met with an
ancient woman who had just opened her door, and I fell into chat with
her, and asked her a great many wild questions of things all remote to
my purpose and design; but in my discourse I found by her how the town
was situated, that I was in a street that went out towards Hadley, but
that such a street went towards the water-side, such a street towards
Colchester, and so the London road lay there.

I had soon my ends of this old woman, for I only wanted to know which
was the London road, and away I walked as fast as I could; not that I
intended to go on foot, either to London or to Colchester, but I wanted
to get quietly away from Ipswich.

I walked about two or three miles, and then I met a plain countryman,
who was busy about some husbandry work, I did not know what, and I
asked him a great many questions first, not much to the purpose, but at
last told him I was going for London, and the coach was full, and I
could not get a passage, and asked him if he could tell me where to
hire a horse that would carry double, and an honest man to ride before
me to Colchester, that so I might get a place there in the coaches.
The honest clown looked earnestly at me, and said nothing for above
half a minute, when, scratching his poll, 'A horse, say you and to
Colchester, to carry double?  why yes, mistress, alack-a-day, you may
have horses enough for money.'  'Well, friend,' says I, 'that I take
for granted; I don't expect it without money.'  'Why, but, mistress,'
says he, 'how much are you willing to give?'  'Nay,' says I again,
'friend, I don't know what your rates are in the country here, for I am
a stranger; but if you can get one for me, get it as cheap as you can,
and I'll give you somewhat for your pains.'

'Why, that's honestly said too,' says the countryman.  'Not so honest,
neither,' said I to myself, 'if thou knewest all.' 'Why, mistress,'
says he, 'I have a horse that will carry double, and I don't much care
if I go myself with you,' and the like.  'Will you?' says I; 'well, I
believe you are an honest man; if you will, I shall be glad of it; I'll
pay you in reason.'  'Why, look ye, mistress,' says he, 'I won't be out
of reason with you, then; if I carry you to Colchester, it will be
worth five shillings for myself and my horse, for I shall hardly come
back to-night.'

In short, I hired the honest man and his horse; but when we came to a
town upon the road (I do not remember the name of it, but it stands
upon a river), I pretended myself very ill, and I could go no farther
that night but if he would stay there with me, because I was a
stranger, I would pay him for himself and his horse with all my heart.

This I did because I knew the Dutch gentlemen and their servants would
be upon the road that day, either in the stagecoaches or riding post,
and I did not know but the drunken fellow, or somebody else that might
have seen me at Harwich, might see me again, and so I thought that in
one day's stop they would be all gone by.

We lay all that night there, and the next morning it was not very early
when I set out, so that it was near ten o'clock by the time I got to
Colchester.  It was no little pleasure that I saw the town where I had
so many pleasant days, and I made many inquiries after the good old
friends I had once had there, but could make little out; they were all
dead or removed.  The young ladies had been all married or gone to
London; the old gentleman and the old lady that had been my early
benefactress all dead; and which troubled me most, the young gentleman
my first lover, and afterwards my brother-in-law, was dead; but two
sons, men grown, were left of him, but they too were transplanted to
London.

I dismissed my old man here, and stayed incognito for three or four
days in Colchester, and then took a passage in a waggon, because I
would not venture being seen in the Harwich coaches.  But I needed not
have used so much caution, for there was nobody in Harwich but the
woman of the house could have known me; nor was it rational to think
that she, considering the hurry she was in, and that she never saw me
but once, and that by candlelight, should have ever discovered me.

I was now returned to London, and though by the accident of the last
adventure I got something considerable, yet I was not fond of any more
country rambles, nor should I have ventured abroad again if I had
carried the trade on to the end of my days. I gave my governess a
history of my travels; she liked the Harwich journey well enough, and
in discoursing of these things between ourselves she observed, that a
thief being a creature that watches the advantages of other people's
mistakes, 'tis impossible but that to one that is vigilant and
industrious many opportunities must happen, and therefore she thought
that one so exquisitely keen in the trade as I was, would scarce fail
of something extraordinary wherever I went.

On the other hand, every branch of my story, if duly considered, may be
useful to honest people, and afford a due caution to people of some
sort or other to guard against the like surprises, and to have their
eyes about them when they have to do with strangers of any kind, for
'tis very seldom that some snare or other is not in their way.  The
moral, indeed, of all my history is left to be gathered by the senses
and judgment of the reader; I am not qualified to preach to them.  Let
the experience of one creature completely wicked, and completely
miserable, be a storehouse of useful warning to those that read.

I am drawing now towards a new variety of the scenes of life.  Upon my
return, being hardened by a long race of crime, and success
unparalleled, at least in the reach of my own knowledge, I had, as I
have said, no thoughts of laying down a trade which, if I was to judge
by the example of other, must, however, end at last in misery and
sorrow.

It was on the Christmas day following, in the evening, that, to finish
a long train of wickedness, I went abroad to see what might offer in my
way; when going by a working silversmith's in Foster Lane, I saw a
tempting bait indeed, and not be resisted by one of my occupation, for
the shop had nobody in it, as I could see, and a great deal of loose
plate lay in the window, and at the seat of the man, who usually, as I
suppose, worked at one side of the shop.

I went boldly in, and was just going to lay my hand upon a piece of
plate, and might have done it, and carried it clear off, for any care
that the men who belonged to the shop had taken of it; but an officious
fellow in a house, not a shop, on the other side of the way, seeing me
go in, and observing that there was nobody in the shop, comes running
over the street, and into the shop, and without asking me what I was,
or who, seizes upon me, an cries out for the people of the house.

I had not, as I said above, touched anything in the shop, and seeing a
glimpse of somebody running over to the shop, I had so much presence of
mind as to knock very  hard with my foot on the floor of the house, and
was just calling out too, when the fellow laid hands on me.

However, as I had always most courage when I was in most danger, so
when the fellow laid hands on me, I stood very high upon it, that I
came in to buy half a dozen of silver spoons; and to my good fortune,
it was a silversmith's that sold plate, as well as worked plate for
other shops.  The fellow laughed at that part, and put such a value
upon the service that he had done his neighbour, that he would have it
be that I came not to buy, but to steal; and raising a great crowd.  I
said to the master of the shop, who by this time was fetched home from
some neighbouring place, that it was in vain to make noise, and enter
into talk there of the case; the fellow had insisted that I came to
steal, and he must prove it, and I desired we might go before a
magistrate without any more words; for I began to see I should be too
hard for the man that had seized me.

The master and mistress of the shop were really not so violent as the
man from t'other side of the way; and the man said, 'Mistress, you
might come into the shop with a good design for aught I know, but it
seemed a dangerous thing for you to come into such a shop as mine is,
when you see nobody there; and I cannot do justice to my neighbour, who
was so kind to me, as not to acknowledge he had reason on his side;
though, upon the whole, I do not find you attempted to take anything,
and I really know not what to do in it.'  I pressed him to go before a
magistrate with me, and if anything could be proved on me that was like
a design of robbery, I should willingly submit, but if not, I expected
reparation.

Just while we were in this debate, and a crowd of people gathered about
the door, came by Sir T. B., an alderman of the city, and justice of
the peace, and the goldsmith hearing of it, goes out, and entreated his
worship to come in and decide the case.

Give the goldsmith his due, he told his story with a great deal of
justice and moderation, and the fellow that had come over, and seized
upon me, told his with as much heat and foolish passion, which did me
good still, rather than harm.  It came then to my turn to speak, and I
told his worship that I was a stranger in London, being newly come out
of the north; that I lodged in such a place, that I was passing this
street, and went into the goldsmith's shop to buy half a dozen of
spoons.  By great luck I had an old silver spoon in my pocket, which I
pulled out, and told him I had carried that spoon to match it with half
a dozen of new ones, that it might match some I had in the country.

That seeing nobody I the shop, I knocked with my foot very hard to make
the people hear, and had also called aloud with my voice; 'tis true,
there was loose plate in the shop, but that nobody could say I had
touched any of it, or gone near it; that a fellow came running into the
shop out of the street, and laid hands on me in a furious manner, in
the very moments while I was calling for the people of the house; that
if he had really had a mind to have done his neighbour any service, he
should have stood at a distance, and silently watched to see whether I
had touched anything or no, and then have clapped in upon me, and taken
me in the fact.  'That is very true,' says Mr. Alderman, and turning to
the fellow that stopped me, he asked him if it was true that I knocked
with my foot?  He said, yes, I had knocked, but that might be because
of his coming.  'Nay,' says the alderman, taking him short, 'now you
contradict yourself, for just now you said she was in the shop with her
back to you, and did not see you till you came upon her.'  Now it was
true that my back was partly to the street, but yet as my business was
of a kind that required me to have my eyes every way, so I really had a
glance of him running over, as I said before, though he did not
perceive it.

After a full hearing, the alderman gave it as his opinion that his
neighbour was under a mistake, and that I was innocent, and the
goldsmith acquiesced in it too, and his wife, and so I was dismissed;
but as I was going to depart, Mr. Alderman said, 'But hold, madam, if
you were designing to buy spoons, I hope you will not let my friend
here lose his customer by the mistake.'  I readily answered, 'No, sir,
I'll buy the spoons still, if he can match my odd spoon, which I
brought for a pattern'; and the goldsmith showed me some of the very
same fashion.  So he weighed the spoons, and they came to
five-and-thirty shillings, so I pulls out my purse to pay him, in which
I had near twenty guineas, for I never went without such a sum about
me, whatever might happen, and I found it of use at other times as well
as now.

When Mr. Alderman saw my money, he said, 'Well, madam, now I am
satisfied you were wronged, and it was for this reason that I moved you
should buy the spoons, and stayed till you had bought them, for if you
had not had money to pay for them, I should have suspected that you did
not come into the shop with an intent to buy, for indeed the sort of
people who come upon these designs that you have been charged with, are
seldom troubled with much gold in their pockets, as I see you are.'

I smiled, and told his worship, that then I owed something of his
favour to my money, but I hoped he saw reason also in the justice he
had done me before.  He said, yes, he had, but this had confirmed his
opinion, and he was fully satisfied now of my having been injured.  So
I came off with flying colours, though from an affair in which I was at
the very brink of destruction.

It was but three days after this, that not at all made cautious by my
former danger, as I used to be, and still pursuing the art which I had
so long been employed in, I ventured into a house where I saw the doors
open, and furnished myself, as I though verily without being perceived,
with two pieces of flowered silks, such as they call brocaded silk,
very rich.  It was not a mercer's shop, nor a warehouse of a mercer,
but looked like a private dwelling-house, and was, it seems, inhabited
by a man that sold goods for the weavers to the mercers, like a broker
or factor.

That I may make short of this black part of this story, I was attacked
by two wenches that came open-mouthed at me just as I was going out at
the door, and one of them pulled me back into the room, while the other
shut the door upon me.  I would have given them good words, but there
was no room for it, two fiery dragons could not have been more furious
than they were; they tore my clothes, bullied and roared as if they
would have murdered me; the mistress of the house came next, and then
the master, and all outrageous, for a while especially.

I gave the master very good words, told him the door was open, and
things were a temptation to me, that I was poor and distressed, and
poverty was when many could not resist, and begged him with tears to
have pity on me.  The mistress of the house was moved with compassion,
and inclined to have let me go, and had almost persuaded her husband to
it also, but the saucy wenches were run, even before they were sent,
and had fetched a constable, and then the master said he could not go
back, I must go before a justice, and answered his wife that he might
come into trouble himself if he should let me go.

The sight of the constable, indeed, struck me with terror, and I
thought I should have sunk into the ground.  I fell into faintings, and
indeed the people themselves thought I would have died, when the woman
argued again for me, and entreated her husband, seeing they had lost
nothing, to let me go.  I offered him to pay for the two pieces,
whatever the value was, though I had not got them, and argued that as
he had his goods, and had really lost nothing, it would be cruel to
pursue me to death, and have my blood for the bare attempt of taking
them.  I put the constable in mind that I had broke no doors, nor
carried anything away; and when I came to the justice, and pleaded
there that I had neither broken anything to get in, nor carried
anything out, the justice was inclined to have released me; but the
first saucy jade that stopped me, affirming that I was going out with
the goods, but that she stopped me and pulled me back as I was upon the
threshold, the justice upon that point committed me, and I was carried
to Newgate.  That horrid place! my very blood chills at the mention of
its name; the place where so many of my comrades had been locked up,
and from whence they went to the fatal tree; the place where my mother
suffered so deeply, where I was brought into the world, and from whence
I expected no redemption but by an infamous death:  to conclude, the
place that had so long expected me, and which with so much art and
success I had so long avoided.

I was not fixed indeed; 'tis impossible to describe the terror of my
mind, when I was first brought in, and when I looked around upon all
the horrors of that dismal place.  I looked on myself as lost, and that
I had nothing to think of but of going out of the world, and that with
the utmost infamy:  the hellish noise, the roaring, swearing, and
clamour, the stench and nastiness, and all the dreadful crowd of
afflicting things that I saw there, joined together to make the place
seem an emblem of hell itself, and a kind of an entrance into it.

Now I reproached myself with the many hints I had had, as I have
mentioned above, from my own reason, from the sense of my good
circumstances, and of the many dangers I had escaped, to leave off
while I was well, and how I had withstood them all, and hardened my
thoughts against all fear.  It seemed to me that I was hurried on by an
inevitable and unseen fate to this day of misery, and that now I was to
expiate all my offences at the gallows; that I was now to give
satisfaction to justice with my blood, and that I was come to the last
hour of my life and of my wickedness together.  These things poured
themselves in upon my thoughts in a confused manner, and left me
overwhelmed with melancholy and despair.

Them I repented heartily of all my life past, but that repentance
yielded me no satisfaction, no peace, no, not in the least, because, as
I said to myself, it was repenting after the power of further sinning
was taken away.  I seemed not to mourn that I had committed such
crimes, and for the fact as it was an offence against God and my
neighbour, but I mourned that I was to be punished for it.  I was a
penitent, as I thought, not that I had sinned, but that I was to
suffer, and this took away all the comfort, and even the hope of my
repentance in my own thoughts.

I got no sleep for several nights or days after I came into that
wretched place, and glad I would have been for some time to have died
there, though I did not consider dying as it ought to be considered
neither; indeed, nothing could be filled with more horror to my
imagination than the very place, nothing was more odious to me than the
company that was there.  Oh!  if I had but been sent to any place in
the world, and not to Newgate, I should have thought myself happy.

In the next place, how did the hardened wretches that were there before
me triumph over me!  What! Mrs. Flanders come to Newgate at last?
What! Mrs. Mary, Mrs. Molly, and after that plain Moll Flanders? They
thought the devil had helped me, they said, that I had reigned so long;
they expected me there many years ago, and was I come at last?  Then
they flouted me with my dejections, welcomed me to the place, wished me
joy, bid me have a good heart, not to be cast down, things might not be
so bad as I feared, and the like; then called for brandy, and drank to
me, but put it all up to my score, for they told me I was but just come
to the college, as they called it, and sure I had money in my pocket,
though they had none.

I asked one of this crew how long she had been there.  She said four
months. I asked her how the place looked to her when she first came
into it.  'Just as it did now to you,' says she, dreadful and
frightful'; that she thought she was in hell; 'and I believe so still,'
adds she, 'but it is natural to me now, I don't disturb myself about
it.'  'I suppose,' says I, 'you are in no danger of what is to follow?'
'Nay,' says she, 'for you are mistaken there, I assure you, for I am
under sentence, only I pleaded my belly, but I am no more with child
than the judge that tried me, and I expect to be called down next
sessions.' This 'calling down' is calling down to their former
judgment, when a woman has been respited for her belly, but proves not
to be with child, or if she has been with child, and has been brought
to bed.  'Well,' says I, 'are you thus easy?'  'Ay,' says she, 'I can't
help myself; what signifies being sad?  If I am hanged, there's an end
of me,' says she; and away she turns dancing, and sings as she goes the
following piece of Newgate wit ----

    'If I swing by the string
     I shall hear the bell ring
     And then there's an end of poor Jenny.'

I mention this because it would be worth the observation of any
prisoner, who shall hereafter fall into the same misfortune, and come
to that dreadful place of Newgate, how time, necessity, and conversing
with the wretches that are there familiarizes the place to them; how at
last they become reconciled to that which at first was the greatest
dread upon their spirits in the world, and are as impudently cheerful
and merry in their misery as they were when out of it.

I cannot say, as some do, this devil is not so black as he is painted;
for indeed no colours can represent the place to the life, not any soul
conceive aright of it but those who have been sufferers there.  But how
hell should become by degree so natural, and not only tolerable, but
even agreeable, is a thing unintelligible but by those who have
experienced it, as I have.

The same night that I was sent to Newgate, I sent the news of it to my
old governess, who was surprised at it, you may be sure, and spent the
night almost as ill out of Newgate, as I did in it.

The next morning she came to see me; she did what she could to comfort
me, but she saw that was to no purpose; however, as she said, to sink
under the weight was but to increase the weight; she immediately
applied herself to all the proper methods to prevent the effects of it,
which we feared, and first she found out the two fiery jades that had
surprised me.  She tampered with them, offered them money, and, in a
word, tried all imaginable ways to prevent a prosecution; she offered
one of the wenches #100 to go away from her mistress, and not to appear
against me, but she was so resolute, that though she was but a servant
maid at #3 a year wages or thereabouts, she refused it, and would have
refused it, as my governess said she believed, if she had offered her
#500.  Then she attacked the other maid; she was not so hard-hearted in
appearance as the other, and sometimes seemed inclined to be merciful;
but the first wench kept her up, and changed her mind, and would not so
much as let my governess talk with her, but threatened to have her up
for tampering with the evidence.

Then she applied to the master, that is to say, the man whose goods had
been stolen, and particularly to his wife, who, as I told you, was
inclined at first to have some compassion for me; she found the woman
the same still, but the man alleged he was bound by the justice that
committed me, to prosecute, and that he should forfeit his recognisance.

My governess offered to find friends that should get his recognisances
off of the file, as they call it, and that he should not suffer; but it
was not possible to convince him that could be done, or that he could
be safe any way in the world but by appearing against me; so I was to
have three witnesses of fact against me, the master and his two maids;
that is to say, I was as certain to be cast for my life as I was
certain that I was alive, and I had nothing to do but to think of
dying, and prepare for it.  I had but a sad foundation to build upon,
as I said before, for all my repentance appeared to me to be only the
effect of my fear of death, not a sincere regret for the wicked life
that I had lived, and which had brought this misery upon me, for the
offending my Creator, who was now suddenly to be my judge.

I lived many days here under the utmost horror of soul; I had death, as
it were, in view, and thought of nothing night and day, but of gibbets
and halters, evil spirits and devils; it is not to be expressed by
words how I was harassed, between the dreadful apprehensions of death
and the terror of my conscience reproaching me with my past horrible
life.

The ordinary of Newgate came to me, and talked a little in his way, but
all his divinity ran upon confessing my crime, as he called it (though
he knew not what I was in for), making a full discovery, and the like,
without which he told me God would never forgive me; and he said so
little to the purpose, that I had no manner of consolation from him;
and then to observe the poor creature preaching confession and
repentance to me in the morning, and find him drunk with brandy and
spirits by noon, this had something in it so shocking, that I began to
nauseate the man more than his work, and his work too by degrees, for
the sake of the man; so that I desired him to trouble me no more.

I know not how it was, but by the indefatigable application of my
diligent governess I had no bill preferred against me the first
sessions, I mean to the grand jury, at Guildhall; so I had another
month or five weeks before me, and without doubt this ought to have
been accepted by me, as so much time given me for reflection upon what
was past, and preparation for what was to come; or, in a word, I ought
to have esteemed it as a space given me for repentance, and have
employed it as such, but it was not in me.  I was sorry (as before) for
being in Newgate, but had very few signs of repentance about me.

On the contrary, like the waters in the cavities and hollows of
mountains, which petrify and turn into stone whatever they are suffered
to drop on, so the continual conversing with such a crew of hell-hounds
as I was, had the same common operation upon me as upon other people.
I degenerated into stone; I turned first stupid and senseless, then
brutish and thoughtless, and at last raving mad as any of them were;
and, in short, I became as naturally pleased and easy with the place,
as if indeed I had been born there.

It is scarce possible to imagine that our natures should be capable of
so much degeneracy, as to make that pleasant and agreeable that in
itself is the most complete misery.  Here was a circumstance that I
think it is scarce possible to mention a worse:  I was as exquisitely
miserable as, speaking of common cases, it was possible for any one to
be that had life and health, and money to help them, as I had.

I had weight of guilt upon me enough to sink any creature who had the
least power of reflection left, and had any sense upon them of the
happiness of this life, of the misery of another; then I had at first
remorse indeed, but no repentance; I had now neither remorse nor
repentance.  I had a crime charged on me, the punishment of which was
death by our law; the proof so evident, that there was no room for me
so much as to plead not guilty.  I had the name of an old offender, so
that I had nothing to expect but death in a few weeks' time, neither
had I myself any thoughts of escaping; and yet a certain strange
lethargy of soul possessed me.  I had no trouble, no apprehensions, no
sorrow about me, the first surprise was gone; I was, I may well say, I
know not how; my senses, my reason, nay, my conscience, were all
asleep; my course of life for forty years had been a horrid
complication of wickedness, whoredom, adultery, incest, lying, theft;
and, in a word, everything but murder and treason had been my practice
from the age of eighteen, or thereabouts, to three-score; and now I was
engulfed in the misery of punishment, and had an infamous death just at
the door, and yet I had no sense of my condition, no thought of heaven
or hell at least, that went any farther than a bare flying touch, like
the stitch or pain that gives a hint and goes off.  I neither had a
heart to ask God's mercy, nor indeed to think of it.  And in this, I
think, I have given a brief description of the completest misery on
earth.

All my terrifying thoughts were past, the horrors of the place were
become familiar, and I felt no more uneasiness at the noise and
clamours of the prison, than they did who made that noise; in a word, I
was become a mere Newgate-bird, as wicked and as outrageous as any of
them; nay, I scarce retained the habit and custom of good breeding and
manners, which all along till now ran through my conversation; so
thorough a degeneracy had possessed me, that I was no more the same
thing that I had been, than if I had never been otherwise than what I
was now.

In the middle of this hardened part of my life I had another sudden
surprise, which called me back a little to that thing called sorrow,
which indeed I began to be past the sense of before.  They told me one
night that there was brought into the prison late the night before
three highwaymen, who had committed robbery somewhere on the road to
Windsor, Hounslow Heath, I think it was, and were pursued to Uxbridge
by the country, and were taken there after a gallant resistance, in
which I know not how many of the country people were wounded, and some
killed.

It is not to be wondered that we prisoners were all desirous enough to
see these brave, topping gentlemen, that were talked up to be such as
their fellows had not been known, and especially because it was said
they would in the morning be removed into the press-yard, having given
money to the head master of the prison, to be allowed the liberty of
that better part of the prison.  So we that were women placed ourselves
in the way, that we would be sure to see them; but nothing could
express the amazement and surprise I was in, when the very first man
that came out I knew to be my Lancashire husband, the same who lived so
well at Dunstable, and the same who I afterwards saw at Brickhill, when
I was married to my last husband, as has been related.

I was struck dumb at the sight, and knew neither what to say nor what
to do; he did not know me, and that was all the present relief I had.
I quitted my company, and retired as much as that dreadful place
suffers anybody to retire, and I cried vehemently for a great while.
'Dreadful creature that I am,' said I, 'how many poor people have I made
miserable?  How many desperate wretches have I sent to the devil?'  He
had told me at Chester he was ruined by that match, and that his
fortunes were made desperate on my account; for that thinking I had
been a fortune, he was run into debt more than he was able to pay, and
that he knew not what course to take; that he would go into the army
and carry a musket, or buy a horse and take a tour, as he called it;
and though I never told him that I was a fortune, and so did not
actually deceive him myself, yet I did encourage the having it thought
that I was so, and by that means I was the occasion originally of his
mischief.

The surprise of the thing only struck deeper into my thoughts, and gave
me stronger reflections than all that had befallen me before.  I
grieved day and night for him, and the more for that they told me he
was the captain of the gang, and that he had committed so many
robberies, that Hind, or Whitney, or the Golden Farmer were fools to
him; that he would surely be hanged if there were no more men left in
the country he was born in; and that there would abundance of people
come in against him.

I was overwhelmed with grief for him; my own case gave me no
disturbance compared to this, and I loaded myself with reproaches on
his account.  I bewailed his misfortunes, and the ruin he was now come
to, at such a rate, that I relished nothing now as I did before, and
the first reflections I made upon the horrid, detestable life I had
lived began to return upon me, and as these things returned, my
abhorrence of the place I was in, and of the way of living in it,
returned also; in a word, I was perfectly changed, and become another
body.

While I was under these influences of sorrow for him, came notice to me
that the next sessions approaching there would be a bill preferred to
the grand jury against me, and that I should be certainly tried for my
life at the Old Bailey.  My temper was touched before, the hardened,
wretched boldness of spirit which I had acquired abated, and conscious
in the prison, guilt began to flow in upon my mind.  In short, I began
to think, and to think is one real advance from hell to heaven.  All
that hellish, hardened state and temper of soul, which I have said so
much of before, is but a deprivation of thought; he that is restored to
his power of thinking, is restored to himself.

As soon as I began, I say, to think, the first think that occurred to
me broke out thus:  'Lord! what will become of me?  I shall certainly
die!  I shall be cast, to be sure, and there is nothing beyond that but
death!  I have no friends; what shall I do?  I shall be certainly cast!
Lord, have mercy upon me!  What will become of me?'  This was a sad
thought, you will say, to be the first, after so long a time, that had
started into my soul of that kind, and yet even this was nothing but
fright at what was to come; there was not a word of sincere repentance
in it all.  However, I was indeed dreadfully dejected, and disconsolate
to the last degree; and as I had no friend in the world to communicate
my distressed thoughts to, it lay so heavy upon me, that it threw me
into fits and swoonings several times a day.  I sent for my old
governess, and she, give her her due, acted the part of a true friend.
She left no stone unturned to prevent the grand jury finding the bill.
She sought out one or two of the jurymen, talked with them, and
endeavoured to possess them with favourable dispositions, on account
that nothing was taken away, and no house broken, etc.; but all would
not do, they were over-ruled by the rest; the two wenches swore home to
the fact, and the jury found the bill against me for robbery and
house-breaking, that is, for felony and burglary.

I sunk down when they brought me news of it, and after I came to myself
again, I thought I should have died with the weight of it.  My
governess acted a true mother to me; she pitied me, she cried with me,
and for me, but she could not help me; and to add to the terror of it,
'twas the discourse all over the house that I should die for it.  I
could hear them talk it among themselves very often, and see them shake
their heads and say they were sorry for it, and the like, as is usual
in the place.  But still nobody came to tell me their thoughts, till at
last one of the keepers came to me privately, and said with a sigh,
'Well, Mrs. Flanders, you will be tried on Friday' (this was but a
Wednesday); 'what do you intend to do?'  I turned as white as a clout,
and said, 'God knows what I shall do; for my part, I know not what to
do.'  'Why,' says he, 'I won't flatter you, I would have you prepare
for death, for I doubt you will be cast; and as they say you are an old
offender, I doubt you will find but little mercy.  They say,' added he,
'your case is very plain, and that the witnesses swear so home against
you, there will be no standing it.'

This was a stab into the very vitals of one under such a burthen as I
was oppressed with before, and I could not speak to him a word, good or
bad, for a great while; but at last I burst out into tears, and said to
him, 'Lord! Mr. ----, what must I do?'  'Do!' says he, 'send for the
ordinary; send for a minister and talk with him; for, indeed, Mrs.
Flanders, unless you have very good friends, you are no woman for this
world.'

This was plain dealing indeed, but it was very harsh to me, at least I
thought it so.  He left me in the greatest confusion imaginable, and
all that night I lay awake.  And now I began to say my prayers, which I
had scarce done before since my last husband's death, or from a little
while after.  And truly I may well call it saying my prayers, for I was
in such a confusion, and had such horror upon my mind, that though I
cried, and repeated several times the ordinary expression of 'Lord,
have mercy upon me!' I never brought myself to any sense of my being a
miserable sinner, as indeed I was, and of confessing my sins to God,
and begging pardon for the sake of Jesus Christ.  I was overwhelmed
with the sense of my condition, being tried for my life, and being sure
to be condemned, and then I was as sure to be executed, and on this
account I cried out all night, 'Lord, what will become of me?  Lord!
what shall I do?  Lord! I shall be hanged!  Lord, have mercy upon me!'
and the like.

My poor afflicted governess was now as much concerned as I, and a great
deal more truly penitent, though she had no prospect of being brought
to trial and sentence.  Not but that she deserved it as much as I, and
so she said herself; but she had not done anything herself for many
years, other than receiving what I and others stole, and encouraging us
to steal it.  But she cried, and took on like a distracted body,
wringing her hands, and crying out that she was undone, that she
believed there was a curse from heaven upon her, that she should be
damned, that she had been the destruction of all her friends, that she
had brought such a one, and such a one, and such a one to the gallows;
and there she reckoned up ten or eleven people, some of which I have
given account of, that came to untimely ends; and that now she was the
occasion of my ruin, for she had persuaded me to go on, when I would
have left off.  I interrupted her there.  'No, mother, no,' said I,
'don't speak of that, for you would have had me left off when I got the
mercer's money again, and when I came home from Harwich, and I would
not hearken to you; therefore you have not been to blame; it is I only
have ruined myself, I have brought myself to this misery'; and thus we
spent many hours together.

Well, there was no remedy; the prosecution went on, and on the Thursday
I was carried down to the sessions-house, where I was arraigned, as
they called it, and the next day I was appointed to be tried.  At the
arraignment I pleaded 'Not guilty,' and well I might, for I was
indicted for felony and burglary; that is, for feloniously stealing two
pieces of brocaded silk, value #46, the goods of Anthony Johnson, and
for breaking open his doors; whereas I knew very well they could not
pretend to prove I had broken up the doors, or so much as lifted up a
latch.

On the Friday I was brought to my trial.  I had exhausted my spirits
with crying for two or three days before, so that I slept better the
Thursday night than I expected, and had more courage for my trial than
indeed I thought possible for me to have.

When the trial began, the indictment was read, I would have spoke, but
they told me the witnesses must be heard first, and then I should have
time to be heard.  The witnesses were the two wenches, a couple of
hard-mouthed jades indeed, for though the thing was truth in the main,
yet they aggravated it to the utmost extremity, and swore I had the
goods wholly in my possession, that I had hid them among my clothes,
that I was going off with them, that I had one foot over the threshold
when they discovered themselves, and then I put t' other over, so that
I was quite out of the house in the street with the goods before they
took hold of me, and then they seized me, and brought me back again,
and they took the goods upon me.  The fact in general was all true, but
I believe, and insisted upon it, that they stopped me before I had set
my foot clear of the threshold of the house.  But that did not argue
much, for certain it was that I had taken the goods, and I was bringing
them away, if I had not been taken.

But I pleaded that I had stole nothing, they had lost nothing, that the
door was open, and I went in, seeing the goods lie there, and with
design to buy.  If, seeing nobody in the house, I had taken any of them
up in my hand it could not be concluded that I intended to steal them,
for that I never carried them farther than the door to look on them
with the better light.

The Court would not allow that by any means, and made a kind of a jest
of my intending to buy the goods, that being no shop for the selling of
anything, and as to carrying them to the door to look at them, the
maids made their impudent mocks upon that, and spent their wit upon it
very much; told the Court I had looked at them sufficiently, and
approved them very well, for I had packed them up under my clothes, and
was a-going with them.

In short, I was found guilty of felony, but acquitted of the burglary,
which was but small comfort to me, the first bringing me to a sentence
of death, and the last would have done no more.  The next day I was
carried down to receive the dreadful sentence, and when they came to
ask me what I had to say why sentence should not pass, I stood mute a
while, but somebody that stood behind me prompted me aloud to speak to
the judges, for that they could represent things favourably for me.
This encouraged me to speak, and I told them I had nothing to say to
stop the sentence, but that I had much to say to bespeak the mercy of
the Court; that I hoped they would allow something in such a case for
the circumstances of it; that I had broken no doors, had carried
nothing off; that nobody had lost anything; that the person whose goods
they were was pleased to say he desired mercy might be shown (which
indeed he very honestly did); that, at the worst, it was the first
offence, and that I had never been before any court of justice before;
and, in a word, I spoke with more courage that I thought I could have
done, and in such a moving tone, and though with tears, yet not so many
tears as to obstruct my speech, that I could see it moved others to
tears that heard me.

The judges sat grave and mute, gave me an easy hearing, and time to say
all that I would, but, saying neither Yes nor No to it, pronounced the
sentence of death upon me, a sentence that was to me like death itself,
which, after it was read, confounded me.  I had no more spirit left in
me, I had no tongue to speak, or eyes to look up either to God or man.

My poor governess was utterly disconsolate, and she that was my
comforter before, wanted comfort now herself; and sometimes mourning,
sometimes raging, was as much out of herself, as to all outward
appearance, as any mad woman in Bedlam.  Nor was she only disconsolate
as to me, but she was struck with horror at the sense of her own wicked
life, and began to look back upon it with a taste quite different from
mine, for she was penitent to the highest degree for her sins, as well
as sorrowful for the misfortune.  She sent for a minister, too, a
serious, pious, good man, and applied herself with such earnestness, by
his assistance, to the work of a sincere repentance, that I believe,
and so did the minister too, that she was a true penitent; and, which
is still more, she was not only so for the occasion, and at that
juncture, but she continued so, as I was informed, to the day of her
death.

It is rather to be thought of than expressed what was now my condition.
I had nothing before me but present death; and as I had no friends to
assist me, or to stir for me, I expected nothing but to find my name in
the dead warrant, which was to come down for the execution, the Friday
afterwards, of five more and myself.

In the meantime my poor distressed governess sent me a minister, who at
her request first, and at my own afterwards, came to visit me.  He
exhorted me seriously to repent of all my sins, and to dally no longer
with my soul; not flattering myself with hopes of life, which, he said,
he was informed there was no room to expect, but unfeignedly to look up
to God with my whole soul, and to cry for pardon in the name of Jesus
Christ.  He backed his discourses with proper quotations of Scripture,
encouraging the greatest sinner to repent, and turn from their evil
way, and when he had done, he kneeled down and prayed with me.

It was now that, for the first time, I felt any real signs of
repentance.  I now began to look back upon my past life with
abhorrence, and having a kind of view into the other side of time, and
things of life, as I believe they do with everybody at such a time,
began to look with a different aspect, and quite another shape, than
they did before.  The greatest and best things, the views of felicity,
the joy, the griefs of life, were quite other things; and I had nothing
in my thoughts but what was so infinitely superior to what I had known
in life, that it appeared to me to be the greatest stupidity in nature
to lay any weight upon anything, though the most valuable in this world.

The word eternity represented itself with all its incomprehensible
additions, and I had such extended notions of it, that I know not how
to express them.  Among the rest, how vile, how gross, how absurd did
every pleasant thing look!--I mean, that we had counted pleasant
before--especially when I reflected that these sordid trifles were the
things for which we forfeited eternal felicity.

With these reflections came, of mere course, severe reproaches of my
own mind for my wretched behaviour in my past life; that I had
forfeited all hope of any happiness in the eternity that I was just
going to enter into, and on the contrary was entitled to all that was
miserable, or had been conceived of misery; and all this with the
frightful addition of its being also eternal.

I am not capable of reading lectures of instruction to anybody, but I
relate this in the very manner in which things then appeared to me, as
far as I am able, but infinitely short of the lively impressions which
they made on my soul at that time; indeed, those impressions are not to
be explained by words, or if they are, I am not mistress of words
enough to express them.  It must be the work of every sober reader to
make just reflections on them, as their own circumstances may direct;
and, without question, this is what every one at some time or other may
feel something of; I mean, a clearer sight into things to come than
they had here, and a dark view of their own concern in them.

But I go back to my own case.  The minister pressed me to tell him, as
far as I thought convenient, in what state I found myself as to the
sight I had of things beyond life.  He told me he did not come as
ordinary of the place, whose business it is to extort confessions from
prisoners, for private ends, or for the further detecting of other
offenders; that his business was to move me to such freedom of
discourse as might serve to disburthen my own mind, and furnish him to
administer comfort to me as far as was in his power; and assured me,
that whatever I said to him should remain with him, and be as much a
secret as if it was known only to God and myself; and that he desired
to know nothing of me, but as above to qualify him to apply proper
advice and assistance to me, and to pray to God for me.

This honest, friendly way of treating me unlocked all the sluices of my
passions.  He broke into my very soul by it; and I unravelled all the
wickedness of my life to him. In a word, I gave him an abridgment of
this whole history; I gave him a picture of my conduct for fifty years
in miniature.

I hid nothing from him, and he in return exhorted me to sincere
repentance, explained to me what he meant by repentance, and then drew
out such a scheme of infinite mercy, proclaimed from heaven to sinners
of the greatest magnitude, that he left me nothing to say, that looked
like despair, or doubting of being accepted; and in this condition he
left me the first night.

He visited me again the next morning, and went on with his method of
explaining the terms of divine mercy, which according to him consisted
of nothing more, or more difficult, than that of being sincerely
desirous of it, and willing to accept it; only a sincere regret for,
and hatred of, those things I had done, which rendered me so just an
object of divine vengeance.  I am not able to repeat the excellent
discourses of this extraordinary man; 'tis all that I am able to do, to
say that he revived my heart, and brought me into such a condition that
I never knew anything of in my life before.  I was covered with shame
and tears for things past, and yet had at the same time a secret
surprising joy at the prospect of being a true penitent, and obtaining
the comfort of a penitent--I mean, the hope of being forgiven; and so
swift did thoughts circulate, and so high did the impressions they had
made upon me run, that I thought I could freely have gone out that
minute to execution, without any uneasiness at all, casting my soul
entirely into the arms of infinite mercy as a penitent.

The good gentleman was so moved also in my behalf with a view of the
influence which he saw these things had on me, that he blessed God he
had come to visit me, and resolved not to leave me till the last
moment; that is, not to leave visiting me.

It was no less than twelve days after our receiving sentence before any
were ordered for execution, and then upon a Wednesday the dead warrant,
as they call it, came down, and I found my name was among them.  A
terrible blow this was to my new resolutions; indeed my heart sank
within me, and I swooned away twice, one after another, but spoke not a
word.  The good minister was sorely afflicted for me, and did what he
could to comfort me with the same arguments, and the same moving
eloquence that he did before, and left me not that evening so long as
the prisonkeepers would suffer him to stay in the prison, unless he
would be locked up with me all night, which he was not willing to be.

I wondered much that I did not see him all the next day, it being the
day before the time appointed for execution; and I was greatly
discouraged, and dejected in my mind, and indeed almost sank for want
of the comfort which he had so often, and with such success, yielded me
on his former visits.  I waited with great impatience, and under the
greatest oppressions of spirits imaginable, till about four o'clock he
came to my apartment; for I had obtained the favour, by the help of
money, nothing being to be done in that place without it, not to be
kept in the condemned hole, as they call it, among the rest of the
prisoners who were to die, but to have a little dirty chamber to myself.

My heart leaped within me for joy when I heard his voice at the door,
even before I saw him; but let any one judge what kind of motion I
found in my soul, when after having made a short excuse for his not
coming, he showed me that his time had been employed on my account;
that he had obtained a favourable report from the Recorder to the
Secretary of State in my particular case, and, in short, that he had
brought me a reprieve.

He used all the caution that he was able in letting me know a thing
which it would have been a double cruelty to have concealed; and yet it
was too much for me; for as grief had overset me before, so did joy
overset me now, and I fell into a much more dangerous swooning than I
did at first, and it was not without a great difficulty that I was
recovered at all.

The good man having made a very Christian exhortation to me, not to let
the joy of my reprieve put the remembrance of my past sorrow out of my
mind, and having told me that he must leave me, to go and enter the
reprieve in the books, and show it to the sheriffs, stood up just
before his going away, and in a very earnest manner prayed to God for
me, that my repentance might be made unfeigned and sincere; and that my
coming back, as it were, into life again, might not be a returning to
the follies of life which I had made such solemn resolutions to
forsake, and to repent of them.  I joined heartily in the petition, and
must needs say I had deeper impressions upon my mind all that night, of
the mercy of God in sparing my life, and a greater detestation of my
past sins, from a sense of the goodness which I had tasted in this
case, than I had in all my sorrow before.

This may be thought inconsistent in itself, and wide from the business
of this book; particularly, I reflect that many of those who may be
pleased and diverted with the relation of the wild and wicked part of
my story may not relish this, which is really the best part of my life,
the most advantageous to myself, and the most instructive to others.
Such, however, will, I hope, allow me the liberty to make my story
complete.  It would be a severe satire on such to say they do not
relish the repentance as much as they do the crime; and that they had
rather the history were a complete tragedy, as it was very likely to
have been.

But I go on with my relation.  The next morning there was a sad scene
indeed in the prison.  The first thing I was saluted with in the
morning was the tolling of the great bell at St.  Sepulchre's, as they
call it, which ushered in the day.  As soon as it began to toll, a
dismal groaning and crying was heard from the condemned hole, where
there lay six poor souls who were to be executed that day, some from
one crime, some for another, and two of them for murder.

This was followed by a confused clamour in the house, among the several
sorts of prisoners, expressing their awkward sorrows for the poor
creatures that were to die, but in a manner extremely differing one
from another.  Some cried for them; some huzzaed, and wished them a
good journey; some damned and cursed those that had brought them to
it--that is, meaning the evidence, or prosecutors--many pitying them,
and some few, but very few, praying for them.

There was hardly room for so much composure of mind as was required for
me to bless the merciful Providence that had, as it were, snatched me
out of the jaws of this destruction.  I remained, as it were, dumb and
silent, overcome with the sense of it, and not able to express what I
had in my heart; for the passions on such occasions as these are
certainly so agitated as not to be able presently to regulate their own
motions.

All the while the poor condemned creatures were preparing to their
death, and the ordinary, as they call him, was busy with them,
disposing them to submit to their sentence--I say, all this while I was
seized with a fit of trembling, as much as I could have been if I had
been in the same condition, as to be sure the day before I expected to
be; I was so violently agitated by this surprising fit, that I shook as
if it had been in the cold fit of an ague, so that I could not speak or
look but like one distracted.  As soon as they were all put into carts
and gone, which, however, I had not courage enough to see--I say, as
soon as they were gone, I fell into a fit of crying involuntarily, and
without design, but as a mere distemper, and yet so violent, and it
held me so long, that I knew not what course to take, nor could I stop,
or put a check to it, no, not with all the strength and courage I had.

This fit of crying held me near two hours, and, as I believe, held me
till they were all out of the world, and then a most humble, penitent,
serious kind of joy succeeded; a real transport it was, or passion of
joy and thankfulness, but still unable to give vent to it by words, and
in this I continued most part of the day.

In the evening the good minister visited me again, and then fell to his
usual good discourses.  He congratulated my having a space yet allowed
me for repentance, whereas the state of those six poor creatures was
determined, and they were now past the offers of salvation; he
earnestly pressed me to retain the same sentiments of the things of
life that I had when I had a view of eternity; and at the end of all
told me I should not conclude that all was over, that a reprieve was
not a pardon, that he could not yet answer for the effects of it;
however, I had this mercy, that I had more time given me, and that it
was my business to improve that time.

This discourse, though very seasonable, left a kind of sadness on my
heart, as if I might expect the affair would have a tragical issue
still, which, however, he had no certainty of; and I did not indeed, at
that time, question him about it, he having said that he would do his
utmost to bring it to a good end, and that he hoped he might, but he
would not have me be secure; and the consequence proved that he had
reason for what he said.

It was about a fortnight after this that I had some just apprehensions
that I should be included in the next dead warrant at the ensuing
sessions; and it was not without great difficulty, and at last a humble
petition for transportation, that I avoided it, so ill was I beholding
to fame, and so prevailing was the fatal report of being an old
offender; though in that they did not do me strict justice, for I was
not in the sense of the law an old offender, whatever I was in the eye
of the judge, for I had never been before them in a judicial way
before; so the judges could not charge me with being an old offender,
but the Recorder was pleased to represent my case as he thought fit.

I had now a certainty of life indeed, but with the hard conditions of
being ordered for transportation, which indeed was hard condition in
itself, but not when comparatively considered; and therefore I shall
make no comments upon the sentence, nor upon the choice I was put to.
We shall all choose anything rather than death, especially when 'tis
attended with an uncomfortable prospect beyond it, which was my case.

The good minister, whose interest, though a stranger to me, had
obtained me the reprieve, mourned sincerely for this part.  He was in
hopes, he said, that I should have ended my days under the influence of
good instruction, that I should not have been turned loose again among
such a wretched crew as they generally are, who are thus sent abroad,
where, as he said, I must have more than ordinary secret assistance
from the grace of God, if I did not turn as wicked again as ever.

I have not for a good while mentioned my governess, who had during
most, if not all, of this part been dangerously sick, and being in as
near a view of death by her disease as I was by my sentence, was a
great penitent--I say, I have not mentioned her, nor indeed did I see
her in all this time; but being now recovering, and just able to come
abroad, she came to see me.

I told her my condition, and what a different flux and reflux of tears
and hopes I had been agitated with; I told her what I had escaped, and
upon what terms; and she was present when the minister expressed his
fears of my relapsing into wickedness upon my falling into the wretched
companies that are generally transported.  Indeed I had a melancholy
reflection upon it in my own mind, for I knew what a dreadful gang was
always sent away together, and I said to my governess that the good
minister's fears were not without cause.  'Well, well,' says  she, 'but
I hope you will not be tempted with such a horrid example as that.' And
as soon as the minister was gone, she told me she would not have me
discouraged, for perhaps ways and means might be found out to dispose
of me in a particular way, by myself, of which she would talk further
to me afterward.

I looked earnestly at her, and I thought she looked more cheerful than
she usually had done, and I entertained immediately a thousand notions
of being delivered, but could not for my life image the methods, or
think of one that was in the least feasible; but I was too much
concerned in it to let her go from me without explaining herself,
which, though she was very loth to do, yet my importunity prevailed,
and, while I was still pressing, she answered me in a few words, thus:
'Why, you have money, have you not?  Did you ever know one in your life
that was transported and had a hundred pounds in his pocket, I'll
warrant you, child?' says she.

I understood her presently, but told her I would leave all that to her,
but I saw no room to hope for anything but a strict execution of the
order, and as it was a severity that was esteemed a mercy, there was no
doubt but it would be strictly observed.  She said no more but this:
'We will try what can be done,' and so we parted for that night.

I lay in the prison near fifteen weeks after this order for
transportation was signed.  What the reason of it was, I know not, but
at the end of this time I was put on board of a ship in the Thames, and
with me a gang of thirteen as hardened vile creatures as ever Newgate
produced in my time; and it would really well take up a history longer
than mine to describe the degrees of impudence and audacious villainy
that those thirteen were arrived to, and the manner of their behaviour
in the voyage; of which I have a very diverting account by me, which
the captain of the ship who carried them over gave me the minutes of,
and which he caused his mate to write down at large.

It may perhaps be thought trifling to enter here into a relation of all
the little incidents which attended me in this interval of my
circumstances; I mean, between the final order of my transportation and
the time of my going on board the ship; and I am too near the end of my
story to allow room for it; but something relating to me and my
Lancashire husband I must not omit.

He had, as I have observed already, been carried from the master's side
of the ordinary prison into the press-yard, with three of his comrades,
for they found another to add to them after some time; here, for what
reason I knew not, they were kept in custody without being brought to
trial almost three months.  It seems they found means to bribe or buy
off some of those who were expected to come in against them, and they
wanted evidence for some time to convict them.  After some puzzle on
this account, at first they made a shift to get proof enough against
two of them to carry them off; but the other two, of which my
Lancashire husband was one, lay still in suspense.  They had, I think,
one positive evidence against each of them, but the law strictly
obliging them to have two witnesses, they could make nothing of it.
Yet it seems they were resolved not to part with the men neither, not
doubting but a further evidence would at last come in; and in order to
this, I think publication was made, that such prisoners being taken,
any one that had been robbed by them might come to the prison and see
them.

I took this opportunity to satisfy my curiosity, pretending that I had
been robbed in the Dunstable coach, and that I would go to see the two
highwaymen.  But when I came into the press-yard, I so disguised
myself, and muffled my face up so, that he could see little of me, and
consequently knew nothing of who I was; and when I came back, I said
publicly that I knew them very well.

Immediately it was rumoured all over the prison that Moll Flanders
would turn evidence against one of the highwaymen, and that I was to
come off by it from the sentence of transportation.

They heard of it, and immediately my husband desired to see this Mrs.
Flanders that knew him so well, and was to be an evidence against him;
and accordingly I had leave given to go to him.  I dressed myself up as
well as the best clothes that I suffered myself ever to appear in there
would allow me, and went to the press-yard, but had for some time a
hood over my face.  He said little to me at first, but asked me if I
knew him.  I told him, Yes, very well; but as I concealed my face, so I
counterfeited my voice, that he had not the least guess at who I was.
He asked me where I had seen him.  I told him between Dunstable and
Brickhill; but turning to the keeper that stood by, I asked if I might
not be admitted to talk with him alone.  He said Yes, yes, as much as I
pleased, and so very civilly withdrew.

As soon as he was gone, I had shut the door, I threw off my hood, and
bursting out into tears, 'My dear,' says I, 'do you not know me?'  He
turned pale, and stood speechless, like one thunderstruck, and, not
able to conquer the surprise, said no more but this, 'Let me sit down';
and sitting down by a table, he laid his elbow upon the table, and
leaning his head on his hand, fixed his eyes on the ground as one
stupid.  I cried so vehemently, on the other hand, that it was a good
while ere I could speak any more; but after I had given some vent to my
passion by tears, I repeated the same words, 'My dear, do you not know
me?'  At which he answered, Yes, and said no more a good while.

After some time continuing in the surprise, as above, he cast up his
eyes towards me and said, 'How could you be so cruel?' I did not
readily understand what he meant; and I answered, 'How can you call me
cruel?  What have I been cruel to you in?' 'To come to me,' says he,
'in such a place as this, is it not to insult me?  I have not robbed
you, at least not on the highway.'

I perceived by this that he knew nothing of the miserable circumstances
I was in, and thought that, having got some intelligence of his being
there, I had come to upbraid him with his leaving me.  But I had too
much to say to him to be affronted, and told him in few words, that I
was far from coming to insult him, but at best I came to condole
mutually; that he would be easily satisfied that I had no such view,
when I should tell him that my condition was worse than his, and that
many ways.  He looked a little concerned at the general expression of
my condition being worse than his, but, with a kind smile, looked a
little wildly, and said, 'How can that be?  When you see me fettered,
and in Newgate, and two of my companions executed already, how can
your condition be worse than mine?'

'Come, my dear,' says I, 'we have a long piece of work to do, if I
should be to relate, or you to hear, my unfortunate history; but if you
are disposed to hear it, you will soon conclude with me that my
condition is worse than yours.'  'How is that possible,' says he again,
'when I expect to be cast for my life the very next sessions?'  'Yes,
says I, ''tis very possible, when I shall tell you that I have been
cast for my life three sessions ago, and am under sentence of death; is
not my case worse than yours?'

Then indeed, he stood silent again, like one struck dumb, and after a
while he starts up.  'Unhappy couple!' says he.  'How can this be
possible?'  I took him by the hand.  'Come, my dear,' said I, 'sit
down, and let us compare our sorrows.  I am a prisoner in this very
house, and in much worse circumstances than you, and you will be
satisfied I do not come to insult you, when I tell you the
particulars.'  And with this we sat down together, and I told him so
much of my story as I thought was convenient, bringing it at last to my
being reduced to great poverty, and representing myself as fallen into
some company that led me to relieve my distresses by way that I had
been utterly unacquainted with, and that they making an attempt at a
tradesman's house, I was seized upon for having been but just at the
door, the maid-servant pulling me in; that I neither had broke any lock
nor taken anything away, and that notwithstanding that, I was brought
in guilty and sentenced to die; but that the judges, having been made
sensible of the hardship of my circumstances, had obtained leave to
remit the sentence upon my consenting to be transported.

I told him I fared the worse for being taken in the prison for one Moll
Flanders, who was a famous successful thief, that all of them had heard
of, but none of them had ever seen; but that, as he knew well, was none
of my name.  But I placed all to the account of my ill fortune, and
that under this name I was dealt with as an old offender, though this
was the first thing they had ever known of me.  I gave him a long
particular of things that had befallen me since I saw him, but I told
him if I had seen him since he might think I had, and then gave him an
account how I had seen him at Brickhill; how furiously he was pursued,
and how, by giving an account that I knew him, and that he was a very
honest gentleman, one Mr. ----, the hue-and-cry was stopped, and the
high constable went back again.

He listened most attentively to all my story, and smiled at most of the
particulars, being all of them petty matters, and infinitely below what
he had been at the head of; but when I came to the story of Brickhill,
he was surprised.  'And was it you, my dear,' said he, 'that gave the
check to the mob that was at our heels there, at Brickhill?'  'Yes,'
said I, 'it was I indeed.'  And then I told him the particulars which I
had observed him there.  'Why, then,' said he, 'it was you that saved
my life at that time, and I am glad I owe my life to you, for I will
pay the debt to you now, and I'll deliver you from the present
condition you are in, or I will die in the attempt.'

I told him, by no means; it was a risk too great, not worth his running
the hazard of, and for a life not worth his saving.  'Twas no matter
for that, he said, it was a life worth all the world to him; a life
that had given him a new life; 'for,' says he, 'I was never in real
danger of being taken, but that time, till the last minute when I was
taken.'  Indeed, he told me his danger then lay in his believing he had
not been pursued that way; for they had gone from Hockey quite another
way, and had come over the enclosed country into Brickhill, not by the
road, and were sure they had not been seen by anybody.

Here he gave me a long history of his life, which indeed would make a
very strange history, and be infinitely diverting.  He told me he took
to the road about twelve years before he married me; that the woman
which called him brother was not really his sister, or any kin to him,
but one that belonged to their gang, and who, keeping correspondence
with him, lived always in town, having good store of acquaintance; that
she gave them a perfect intelligence of persons going out of town, and
that they had made several good booties by her correspondence; that she
thought she had fixed a fortune for him when she brought me to him, but
happened to be disappointed, which he really could not blame her for;
that if it had been his good luck that I had had the estate, which she
was informed I had, he had resolved to leave off the road and live a
retired, sober live but never to appear in public till some general
pardon had been passed, or till he could, for money, have got his name
into some particular pardon, that so he might have been perfectly easy;
but that, as it had proved otherwise, he was obliged to put off his
equipage and take up the old trade again.

He gave me a long account of some of his adventures, and particularly
one when he robbed the West Chester coaches near Lichfield, when he got
a very great booty; and after that, how he robbed five graziers, in the
west, going to Burford Fair in Wiltshire to buy sheep.  He told me he
got so much money on those two occasions, that if he had known where to
have found me, he would certainly have embraced my proposal of going
with me to Virginia, or to have settled in a plantation on some other
parts of the English colonies in America.

He told me he wrote two or three letters to me, directed according to
my order, but heard nothing from me.  This I indeed knew to be true,
but the letters coming to my hand in the time of my latter husband, I
could do nothing in it, and therefore chose to give no answer, that so
he might rather believe they had miscarried.

Being thus disappointed, he said, he carried on the old trade ever
since, though when he had gotten so much money, he said, he did not run
such desperate risks as he did before.  Then he gave me some account of
several hard and desperate encounters which he had with gentlemen on
the road, who parted too hardly with their money, and showed me some
wounds he had received; and he had one or two very terrible wounds
indeed, as particularly one by a pistol bullet, which broke his arm,
and another with a sword, which ran him quite through the body, but
that missing his vitals, he was cured again; one of his comrades having
kept with him so faithfully, and so friendly, as that he assisted him
in riding near eighty miles before his arm was set, and then got a
surgeon in a considerable city, remote from that place where it was
done, pretending they were gentlemen travelling towards Carlisle and
that they had been attacked on the road by highwaymen, and that one of
them had shot him into the arm and broke the bone.

This, he said, his friend managed so well, that they were not suspected
at all, but lay still till he was perfectly cured.  He gave me so many
distinct accounts of his adventures, that it is with great reluctance
that I decline the relating them; but I consider that this is my own
story, not his.

I then inquired into the circumstances of his present case at that
time, and what it was he expected when he came to be tried.  He told me
that they had no evidence against him, or but very little; for that of
three robberies, which they were all charged with, it was his good
fortune that he was but in one of them, and that there was but one
witness to be had for that fact, which was not sufficient, but that it
was expected some others would come in against him; that he thought
indeed, when he first saw me, that I had been one that came of that
errand; but that if somebody came in against him, he hoped he should be
cleared; that he had had some intimation, that if he would submit to
transport himself, he might be admitted to it without a trial, but that
he could not think of it with any temper, and thought he could much
easier submit to be hanged.

I blamed him for that, and told him I blamed him on two accounts;
first, because if he was transported, there might be a hundred ways for
him that was a gentleman, and a bold enterprising man, to find his way
back again, and perhaps some ways and means to come back before he
went.  He smiled at that part, and said he should like the last the
best of the two, for he had a kind of horror upon his mind at his being
sent over to the plantations, as Romans sent condemned slaves to work
in the mines; that he thought the passage into another state, let it be
what it would, much more tolerable at the gallows, and that this was
the general notion of all the gentlemen who were driven by the exigence
of their fortunes to take the road; that at the place of execution
there was at least an end of all the miseries of the present state, and
as for what was to follow, a man was, in his opinion, as likely to
repent sincerely in the last fortnight of his life, under the pressures
and agonies of a jail and the condemned hole, as he would ever be in
the woods and wilderness of America; that servitude and hard labour
were things gentlemen could never stoop to; that it was but the way to
force them to be their own executioners afterwards, which was much
worse; and that therefore he could not have any patience when he did
but think of being transported.

I used the utmost of my endeavour to persuade him, and joined that
known woman's rhetoric to it--I mean, that of tears.  I told him the
infamy of a public execution was certainly a greater pressure upon the
spirits of a gentleman than any of the mortifications that he could
meet with abroad could be; that he had at least in the other a chance
for his life, whereas here he had none at all; that it was the easiest
thing in the world for him to manage the captain of a ship, who were,
generally speaking, men of good-humour and some gallantry; and a small
matter of conduct, especially if there was any money to be had, would
make way for him to buy himself off when he came to Virginia.

He looked wistfully at me, and I thought I guessed at what he meant,
that is to say, that he had no money; but I was mistaken, his meaning
was another way.  'You hinted just now, my dear,' said he, 'that there
might be a way of coming back before I went, by which I understood you
that it might be possible to buy it off here.  I had rather give #200
to prevent going, than #100 to be set at liberty when I came there.'
'That is, my dear,' said I, 'because you do not know the place so well
as I do.' 'That may be,' said he; 'and yet I believe, as well as you
know it, you would do the same, unless it is because, as you told me,
you have a mother there.'

I told him, as to my mother, it was next to impossible but that she
must be dead many years before; and as for any other relations that I
might have there, I knew them not now; that since the misfortunes I had
been under had reduced me to the condition I had been in for some
years, I had not kept up any correspondence with them; and that he
would easily believe, I should find but a cold reception from them if I
should be put to make my first visit in the condition of a transported
felon; that therefore, if I went thither, I resolved not to see them;
but that I had many views in going there, if it should be my fate,
which took off all the uneasy part of it; and if he found himself
obliged to go also, I should easily instruct him how to manage himself,
so as never to go a servant at all, especially since I found he was not
destitute of money, which was the only friend in such a condition.

He smiled, and said he did not tell me he had money.  I took him up
short, and told him I hoped he did not understand by my speaking, that
I should expect any supply from him if he had money; that, on the other
hand, though I had not a great deal, yet I did not want, and while I
had any I would rather add to him than weaken him in that article,
seeing, whatever he had, I knew in the case of transportation he would
have occasion of it all.

He expressed himself in a most tender manner upon that head.  He told
me what money he had was not a great deal, but that he would never hide
any of it from me if I wanted it, and that he assured me he did not
speak with any such apprehensions; that he was only intent upon what I
had hinted to him before he went; that here he knew what to do with
himself, but that there he should be the most ignorant, helpless wretch
alive.

I told him he frighted and terrified himself with that which had no
terror in it; that if he had money, as I was glad to hear he had, he
might not only avoid the servitude supposed to be the consequence of
transportation, but begin the world upon a new foundation, and that
such a one as he could not fail of success in, with the common
application usual in such cases; that he could not but call to mind
that it was what I had recommended to him many years before and had
proposed it for our mutual subsistence and restoring our fortunes in
the world; and I would tell him now, that to convince him both of the
certainty of it and of my being fully acquainted with the method, and
also fully satisfied in the probability of success, he should first see
me deliver myself from the necessity of going over at all, and then
that I would go with him freely, and of my own choice, and perhaps
carry enough with me to satisfy him that I did not offer it for want of
being able to live without assistance from him, but that I thought our
mutual misfortunes had been such as were sufficient to reconcile us
both to quitting this part of the world, and living where nobody could
upbraid us with what was past, or we be in any dread of a prison, and
without agonies of a condemned hole to drive us to it; this where we
should look back on all our past disasters with infinite satisfaction,
when we should consider that our enemies should entirely forget us, and
that we should live as new people in a new world, nobody having
anything to say to us, or we to them.

I pressed this home to him with so many arguments, and answered all his
own passionate objections so effectually that he embraced me, and told
me I treated him with such sincerity and affection as overcame him;
that he would take my advice, and would strive to submit to his fate in
hope of having the comfort of my assistance, and of so faithful a
counsellor and such a companion in his misery.  But still he put me in
mind of what I had mentioned before, namely, that there might be some
way to get off before he went, and that it might be possible to avoid
going at all, which he said would be much better.  I told him he should
see, and be fully satisfied, that I would do my utmost in that part
too, and if it did not succeed, yet that I would make good the rest.

We parted after this long conference with such testimonies of kindness
and affection as I thought were equal, if not superior, to that at our
parting at Dunstable; and now I saw more plainly than before, the
reason why he declined coming at that time any farther with me toward
London than Dunstable, and why, when we parted there, he told me it was
not convenient for him to come part of the way to London to bring me
going, as he would otherwise have done.  I have observed that the
account of his life would have made a much more pleasing history than
this of mine; and, indeed, nothing in it was more strange than this
part, viz. that he carried on that desperate trade full five-and-twenty
years and had never been taken, the success he had met with had been so
very uncommon, and such that sometimes he had lived handsomely, and
retired in place for a year or two at a time, keeping himself and a
man-servant to wait on him, and had often sat in the coffee-houses and
heard the very people whom he had robbed give accounts of their being
robbed, and of the place and circumstances, so that he could easily
remember that it was the same.

In this manner, it seems, he lived near Liverpool at the time he
unluckily married me for a fortune.  Had I been the fortune he
expected, I verily believe, as he said, that he would have taken up and
lived honestly all his days.

He had with the rest of his misfortunes the good luck not to be
actually upon the spot when the robbery was done which he was committed
for, and so none of the persons robbed could swear to him, or had
anything to charge upon him.  But it seems as he was taken with the
gang, one hard-mouthed countryman swore home to him, and they were like
to have others come in according to the publication they had made; so
that they expected more evidence against him, and for that reason he
was kept in hold.

However, the offer which was made to him of admitting him to
transportation was made, as I understood, upon the intercession of some
great person who pressed him hard to accept of it before a trial; and
indeed, as he knew there were several that might come in against him, I
thought his friend was in the right, and I lay at him night and day to
delay it no longer.

At last, with much difficulty, he gave his consent; and as he was not
therefore admitted to transportation in court, and on his petition, as
I was, so he found himself under a difficulty to avoid embarking
himself as I had said he might have done; his great friend, who was his
intercessor for the favour of that grant, having given security for him
that he should transport himself, and not return within the term.

This hardship broke all my measures, for the steps I took afterwards
for my own deliverance were hereby rendered wholly ineffectual, unless
I would abandon him, and leave him to go to America by himself; than
which he protested he would much rather venture, although he were
certain to go directly to the gallows.

I must now return to my case.  The time of my being transported
according to my sentence was near at hand; my governess, who continued
my fast friend, had tried to obtain a pardon, but it could not be done
unless with an expense too heavy for my purse, considering that to be
left naked and empty, unless I had resolved to return to my old trade
again, had been worse than my transportation, because there I knew I
could live, here I could not.  The good minister stood very hard on
another account to prevent my being transported also; but he was
answered, that indeed my life had been given me at his first
solicitations, and therefore he ought to ask no more. He was sensibly
grieved at my going, because, as he said, he feared I should lose the
good impressions which a prospect of death had at first made on me, and
which were since increased by his instructions; and the pious gentleman
was exceedingly concerned about me on that account.

On the other hand, I really was not so solicitous about it as I was
before, but I industriously concealed my reasons for it from the
minister, and to the last he did not know but that I went with the
utmost reluctance and affliction.

It was in the month of February that I was, with seven other convicts,
as they called us, delivered to a merchant that traded to Virginia, on
board a ship, riding, as they called it, in Deptford Reach.  The
officer of the prison delivered us on board, and the master of the
vessel gave a discharge for us.

We were for that night clapped under hatches, and kept so close that I
thought I should have been suffocated for want of air; and the next
morning the ship weighed, and fell down the river to a place they call
Bugby's Hole, which was done, as they told us, by the agreement of the
merchant, that all opportunity of escape should be taken from us.
However, when the ship came thither and cast anchor, we were allowed
more liberty, and particularly were permitted to come up on the deck,
but not up on the quarter-deck, that being kept particularly for the
captain and for passengers.

When by the noise of the men over my head, and the motion of the ship,
I perceived that they were under sail, I was at first greatly
surprised, fearing we should go away directly, and that our friends
would not be admitted to see us any more; but I was easy soon after,
when I found they had come to an anchor again, and soon after that we
had notice given by some of the men where we were, that the next
morning we should have the liberty to come up on deck, and to have our
friends come and see us if we had any.

All that night I lay upon the hard boards of the deck, as the
passengers did, but we had afterwards the liberty of little cabins for
such of us as had any bedding to lay in them, and room to stow any box
or trunk for clothes and linen, if we had it (which might well be put
in), for some of them had neither shirt nor shift or a rag of linen or
woollen, but what was on their backs, or a farthing of money to help
themselves; and yet I did not find but they fared well enough in the
ship, especially the women, who got money from the seamen for washing
their clothes, sufficient to  purchase any common things that they
wanted.

When the next morning we had the liberty to come up on the deck, I
asked one of the officers of the ship, whether I might not have the
liberty to send a letter on shore, to let my friends know where the
ship lay, and to get some necessary things sent to me.  This was, it
seems, the boatswain, a very civil, courteous sort of man, who told me
I should have that, or any other liberty that I desired, that he could
allow me with safety.  I told him I desired no other; and he answered
that the ship's boat would go up to London the next tide, and he would
order my letter to be carried.

Accordingly, when the boat went off, the boatswain came to me and told
me the boat was going off, and that he went in it himself, and asked me
if my letter was ready he would take care of it.  I had prepared
myself, you may be sure, pen, ink, and paper beforehand, and I had
gotten a letter ready directed to my governess, and enclosed another
for my fellow-prisoner, which, however, I did not let her know was my
husband, not to the last.  In that to my governess, I let her know
where the ship lay, and pressed her earnestly to send me what things I
knew she had got ready for me for my voyage.

When I gave the boatswain the letter, I gave him a shilling with it,
which I told him was for the charge of a messenger or porter, which I
entreated him to send with the letter as soon as he came on shore, that
if possible I might have an answer brought back by the same hand, that
I might know what was become of my things; 'for sir,' says I, 'if the
ship should go away before I have them on board, I am undone.'

I took care, when I gave him the shilling, to let him see that I had a
little better furniture about me than the ordinary prisoners, for he
saw that I had a purse, and in it a pretty deal of money; and I found
that the very sight of it immediately furnished me with very different
treatment from what I should otherwise have met with in the ship; for
though he was very courteous indeed before, in a kind of natural
compassion to me, as a woman in distress, yet he was more than
ordinarily so afterwards, and procured me to be better treated in the
ship than, I say, I might otherwise have been; as shall appear in its
place.

He very honestly had my letter delivered to my governess's own hands,
and brought me back an answer from her in writing; and when he gave me
the answer, gave me the shilling again.  'There,' says he, 'there's
your shilling again too, for I delivered the letter myself.'  I could
not tell what to say, I was so surprised at the thing; but after some
pause, I said, 'Sir, you are too kind; it had been but reasonable that
you had paid yourself coach-hire, then.'

'No, no,' says he, 'I am overpaid.  What is the gentlewoman?  Your
sister.'

'No, sir,' says I, 'she is no relation to me, but she is a dear friend,
and all the friends I have in the world.'  'Well,' says he, 'there are
few such friends in the world.  Why, she cried after you like a child,'
'Ay,' says I again, 'she would give a hundred pounds, I believe, to
deliver me from this dreadful condition I am in.'

'Would she so?' says he.  'For half the money I believe I could put you
in a way how to deliver yourself.'  But this he spoke softly, that
nobody could hear.

'Alas! sir,' said I, 'but then that must be such a deliverance as, if I
should be taken again, would cost me my life.'  'Nay,' said he, 'if you
were once out of the ship, you must look to yourself afterwards; that I
can say nothing to.'  So we dropped the discourse for that time.

In the meantime, my governess, faithful to the last moment, conveyed my
letter to the prison to my husband, and got an answer to it, and the
next day came down herself to the ship, bringing me, in the first
place, a sea-bed as they call it, and all its furniture, such as was
convenient, but not to let the people think it was extraordinary.  She
brought with her a sea-chest--that is, a chest, such as are made for
seamen, with all the conveniences in it, and filled with everything
almost that I could want; and in one of the corners of the chest, where
there was a private drawer, was my bank of money--this is to say, so
much of it as I had resolved to carry with me; for I ordered a part of
my stock to be left behind me, to be sent afterwards in such goods as I
should want when I came to settle; for money in that country is not of
much use where all things are brought for tobacco, much more is it a
great loss to carry it from hence.

But my case was particular; it was by no means proper to me to go
thither without money or goods, and for a poor convict, that was to be
sold as soon as I came on shore, to carry with me a cargo of goods
would be to have notice taken of it, and perhaps to have them seized by
the public; so I took part of my stock with me thus, and left the other
part with my governess.

My governess brought me a great many other things, but it was not
proper for me to look too well provided in the ship, at least till I
knew what kind of a captain we should have.  When she came into the
ship, I thought she would have died indeed; her heart sank at the sight
of me, and at the thoughts of parting with me in that condition, and
she cried so intolerably, I could not for a long time have any talk
with her.

I took that time to read my fellow-prisoner's letter, which, however,
greatly perplexed me.  He told me he was determined to go, but found it
would be impossible for him to be discharged time enough for going in
the same ship, and which was more than all, he began to question
whether they would give him leave to go in what ship he pleased, though
he did voluntarily transport himself; but that they would see him put
on board such a ship as they should direct, and that he would be
charged upon the captain as other convict prisoners were; so that he
began to be in despair of seeing me till he came to Virginia, which
made him almost desperate; seeing that, on the other hand, if I should
not be there, if any accident of the sea or of mortality should take me
away, he should be the most undone creature there in the world.

This was very perplexing, and I knew not what course to take.  I told
my governess the story of the boatswain, and she was mighty eager with
me treat with him; but I had no mind to it, till I heard whether my
husband, or fellow-prisoner, so she called him, could be at liberty to
go with me or no.  At last I was forced to let her into the whole
matter, except only that of his being my husband.  I told her I had
made a positive bargain or agreement with him to go, if he could get
the liberty of going in the same ship, and that I found he had money.

Then I read a long lecture to her of what I proposed to do when we came
there, how we could plant, settle, and, in short, grow rich without any
more adventures; and, as a great secret, I told her that we were to
marry as soon as he came on board.

She soon agreed cheerfully to my going when she heard this, and she
made it her business from that time to get him out of the prison in
time, so that he might go in the same ship with me, which at last was
brought to pass, though with great difficulty, and not without all the
forms of a transported prisoner-convict, which he really was not yet,
for he had not been tried, and which was a great mortification to him.
As our fate was now determined, and we were both on board, actually
bound to Virginia, in the despicable quality of transported convicts
destined to be sold for slaves, I for five years, and he under bonds
and security not to return to England any more, as long as he lived, he
was very much dejected and cast down; the mortification of being
brought on board, as he was, like a prisoner, piqued him very much,
since it was first told him he should transport himself, and so that he
might go as a gentleman at liberty.  It is true he was not ordered to
be sold when he came there, as we were, and for that reason he was
obliged to pay for his passage to the captain, which we were not; as to
the rest, he was as much at a loss as a child what to do with himself,
or with what he had, but by directions.

Our first business was to compare our stock.  He was very honest to me,
and told me his stock was pretty good when he came into the prison, but
the living there as he did in a figure like a gentleman, and, which was
ten times as much, the making of friends, and soliciting his case, had
been very expensive; and, in a word, all his stock that he had left was
#108, which he had about him all in gold.

I gave him an account of my stock as faithfully, that is to say, of
what I had taken to carry with me, for I was resolved, whatever should
happen, to keep what I had left with my governess in reserve; that in
case I should die, what I had with me was enough to give him, and that
which was left in my governess's hands would be her own, which she had
well deserved of me indeed.

My stock which I had with me was #246 some odd shillings; so that we
had #354 between us, but a worse gotten estate was scarce ever put
together to being the world with.

Our greatest misfortune as to our stock was that it was all in money,
which every one knows is an unprofitable cargo to be carried to the
plantations.  I believe his was really all he had left in the world, as
he told me it was; but I, who had between #700 and #800 in bank when
this disaster befell me, and who had one of the faithfullest friends in
the world to manage it for me, considering she was a woman of manner of
religious principles, had still #300 left in her hand, which I reserved
as above; besides, some very valuable things, as particularly two gold
watches, some small pieces of plate, and some rings--all stolen goods.
The plate, rings, and watches were put in my chest with the money, and
with this fortune, and in the sixty-first year of my age, I launched
out into a new world, as I may call it, in the condition (as to what
appeared) only of a poor, naked convict, ordered to be transported in
respite from the gallows.  My clothes were poor and mean, but not
ragged or dirty, and none knew in the whole ship that I had anything of
value about me.

However, as I had a great many very good clothes and linen in
abundance, which I had ordered to be packed up in two great boxes, I
had them shipped on board, not as my goods, but as consigned to my real
name in Virginia; and had the bills of loading signed by a captain in
my pocket; and in these boxes was my plate and watches, and everything
of value except my money, which I kept by itself in a private drawer in
my chest, which could not be found, or opened, if found, without splitting
the chest to pieces.

In this condition I lay for three weeks in the ship, not knowing
whether I should have my husband with me or no, and therefore not
resolving how or in what manner to receive the honest boatswain's
proposal, which indeed he thought a little strange at first.

At the end of this time, behold my husband came on board.  He looked
with a dejected, angry countenance, his great heart was swelled with
rage and disdain; to be dragged along with three keepers of Newgate,
and put on board like a convict, when he had not so much as been
brought to a trial.  He made loud complaints of it by his friends, for
it seems he had some interest; but his friends got some check in their
application, and were told he had had favour enough, and that they had
received such an account of him, since the last grant of his
transportation, that he ought to think himself very well treated that
he was not prosecuted anew.  This answer quieted him at once, for he
knew too much what might have happened, and what he had room to expect;
and now he saw the goodness of the advice to him, which prevailed with
him to accept of the offer of a voluntary transportation.  And after
this his chagrin at these hell-hounds, as he called them, was a little
over, he looked a little composed, began to be cheerful, and as I was
telling him how glad I was to have him once more out of their hands, he
took me in his arms, and acknowledged with great tenderness that I had
given him the best advice possible.  'My dear,' says he, 'thou has
twice saved my life; from henceforward it shall be all employed for
you, and I'll always take your advice.'

The ship began now to fill; several passengers came on board, who were
embarked on no criminal account, and these had accommodations assigned
them in the great cabin, and other parts of the ship, whereas we, as
convicts, were thrust down below, I know not where.  But when my
husband came on board, I spoke to the boatswain, who had so early given
me hints of his friendship in carrying my letter.  I told him he had
befriended me in many things, and I had not made any suitable return to
him, and with that I put a guinea into his hand.  I told him that my
husband was now come on board; that though we were both under the
present misfortune, yet we had been persons of a different character
from the wretched crew that we came with, and desired to know of him,
whether the captain might not be moved to admit us to some conveniences
in the ship, for which we would make him what satisfaction he pleased,
and that we would gratify him for his pains in procuring this for us.
He took the guinea, as I could see, with great satisfaction, and
assured me of his assistance.

Then he told us he did not doubt but that the captain, who was one of
the best-humoured gentlemen in the world, would be easily brought to
accommodate us as well as we could desire, and, to make me easy, told
me he would go up the next tide on purpose to speak to the captain
about it.  The next morning, happening to sleep a little longer than
ordinary, when I got up, and began to look abroad, I saw the boatswain
among the men in his ordinary business.  I was a little melancholy at
seeing him there, and going forward to speak to him, he saw me, and
came towards me, but not giving him time to speak first, I said,
smiling, 'I doubt, sir, you have forgot us, for I see you are very
busy.'  He returned presently, 'Come along with me, and you shall see.'
So he took me into the great cabin, and there sat a good sort of a
gentlemanly man for a seaman, writing, and with a great many papers
before him.

'Here,' says the boatswain to him that was a-writing, 'is the
gentlewoman that the captain spoke to you of'; and turning to me, he
said, 'I have been so far from forgetting your business, that I have
been up at the captain's house, and have represented faithfully to the
captain what you said, relating to you being furnished with better
conveniences for yourself and your husband; and the captain has sent
this gentleman, who is mate of the ship, down with me, on purpose to
show you everything, and to accommodate you fully to your content, and
bid me assure you that you shall not be treated like what you were at
first expected to be, but with the same respect as other passengers are
treated.'

The mate then spoke to me, and, not giving me time to thank the
boatswain for his kindness, confirmed what the boatswain had said, and
added that it was the captain's delight to show himself kind and
charitable, especially to those that were under any misfortunes, and
with that he showed me several cabins built up, some in the great
cabin, and some partitioned off, out of the steerage, but opening into
the great cabin on purpose for the accommodation of passengers, and
gave me leave to choose where I would.  However, I chose a cabin which
opened into the steerage, in which was very good conveniences to set
our chest and boxes, and a table to eat on.

The mate then told me that the boatswain had given so good a character
of me and my husband, as to our civil behaviour, that he had orders to
tell me we should eat with him, if we thought fit, during the whole
voyage, on the common terms of passengers; that we might lay in some
fresh provisions, if we pleased; or if not, he should lay in his usual
store, and we should have share with him.  This was very reviving news
to me, after so many hardships and afflictions as I had gone through of
late.  I thanked him, and told him the captain should make his own
terms with us, and asked him leave to go and tell my husband of it, who
was not very well, and was not yet out of his cabin.  Accordingly I
went, and my husband, whose spirits were still so much sunk with the
indignity (as he understood it) offered him, that he was scared yet
himself, was so revived with the account that I gave him of the
reception we were like to have in the ship, that he was quite another
man, and new vigour and courage appeared in his very countenance.  So
true is it, that the greatest of spirits, when overwhelmed by their
afflictions, are subject to the greatest dejections, and are the most
apt to despair and give themselves up.

After some little pause to recover himself, my husband came up with me,
and gave the mate thanks for the kindness, which he had expressed to
us, and sent suitable acknowledgment by him to the captain, offering to
pay him by advance, whatever he demanded for our passage, and for the
conveniences he had helped us to.  The mate told him that the captain
would be on board in the afternoon, and that he would leave all that
till he came.  Accordingly, in the afternoon the captain came, and we
found him the same courteous, obliging man that the boatswain had
represented him to be; and he was so well pleased with my husband's
conversation, that, in short, he would not let us keep the cabin we had
chosen, but gave us one that, as I said before, opened into the great
cabin.

Nor were his conditions exorbitant, or the man craving and eager to
make a prey of us, but for fifteen guineas we had our whole passage and
provisions and cabin, ate at the captain's table, and were very
handsomely entertained.

The captain lay himself in the other part of the great cabin, having
let his round house, as they call it, to a rich planter who went over
with his wife and three children, who ate by themselves.  He had some
other ordinary passengers, who quartered in the steerage, and as for
our old fraternity, they were kept under the hatches while the ship lay
there, and came very little on the deck.

I could not refrain acquainting my governess with what had happened; it
was but just that she, who was so really concerned for me, should have
part in my good fortune.  Besides, I wanted her assistance to supply me
with several necessaries, which before I was shy of letting anybody see
me have, that it might not be public; but now I had a cabin and room to
set things in, I ordered abundance of good things for our comfort in
the voyage, as brandy, sugar, lemons, etc., to make punch, and treat
our benefactor, the captain; and abundance of things for eating and
drinking in the voyage; also a larger bed, and bedding proportioned to
it; so that, in a word, we resolved to want for nothing in the voyage.

All this while I had provided nothing for our assistance when we should
come to the place and begin to call ourselves planters; and I was far
from being ignorant of what was needful on that occasion; particularly
all sorts of tools for the planter's work, and for building; and all
kinds of furniture for our dwelling, which, if to be bought in the
country, must necessarily cost double the price.

So I discoursed that point with my governess, and she went and waited
upon the captain, and told him that she hoped ways might be found out
for her two unfortunate cousins, as she called us, to obtain our
freedom when we came into the country, and so entered into a discourse
with him about the means and terms also, of which I shall say more in
its place; and after thus sounding the captain, she let him know,
though we were unhappy in the circumstances that occasioned our going,
yet that we were not unfurnished to set ourselves to work in the
country, and we resolved to settle and live there as planters, if we
might be put in a way how to do it.  The captain readily offered his
assistance, told her the method of entering upon such business, and how
easy, nay, how certain it was for industrious people to recover their
fortunes in such a manner.  'Madam,' says he, ''tis no reproach to any
many in that country to have been sent over in worse circumstances than
I perceive your cousins are in, provided they do but apply with
diligence and good judgment to the business of that place when they
come there.'

She then inquired of him what things it was necessary we should carry
over with us, and he, like a very honest as well as knowing man, told
her thus:  'Madam, your cousins in the first place must procure
somebody to buy them as servants, in conformity to the conditions of
their transportation, and then, in the name of that person, they may go
about what they will; they may either purchase some plantations already
begun, or they may purchase land of the Government of the country, and
begin where they please, and both will be done reasonably.' She bespoke
his favour in the first article, which he promised to her to take upon
himself, and indeed faithfully performed it, and as to the rest, he
promised to recommend us to such as should give us the best advice, and
not to impose upon us, which was as much as could be desired.

She then asked him if it would not be necessary to furnish us with a
stock of tools and materials for the business of planting, and he said,
'Yes, by all means.'  And then she begged his assistance in it.  She
told him she would furnish us with everything that was convenient
whatever it cost her.  He accordingly gave her a long particular of
things necessary for a planter, which, by his account, came to about
fourscore or a hundred pounds.  And, in short, she went about as
dexterously to buy them, as if she had been an old Virginia merchant;
only that she bought, by my direction, above twice as much of
everything as he had given her a list of.

These she put on board in her own name, took his bills of loading for
them, and endorsed those bills of loading to my husband, insuring the
cargo afterwards in her own name, by our order; so that we were
provided for all events, and for all disasters.

I should have told you that my husband gave her all his whole stock of
#108, which, as I have said, he had about him in gold, to lay out thus,
and I gave her a good sum besides; so that I did not break into the
stock which I had left in her hands at all, but after we had sorted out
our whole cargo, we had yet near #200 in money, which was more than
enough for our purpose.

In this condition, very cheerful, and indeed joyful at being so happily
accommodated as we were, we set sail from Bugby's Hole to Gravesend,
where the ship lay about ten more days, and where the captain came on
board for good and all.  Here the captain offered us a civility, which
indeed we had no reason to expect, namely, to let us go on shore and
refresh ourselves, upon giving our words in a solemn manner that we
would not go from him, and that we would return peaceably on board
again.  This was such an evidence of his confidence in us, that it
overcame my husband, who, in a mere principle of gratitude, told him,
as he could not be in any capacity to make a suitable return for such a
favour, so he could not think of accepting of it, nor could he be easy
that the captain should run such a risk.  After some mutual civilities,
I gave my husband a purse, in which was eighty guineas, and he put in
into the captain's hand.  'There, captain,' says he, 'there's part of a
pledge for our fidelity; if we deal dishonestly with you on any
account, 'tis your own.'  And on this we went on shore.

Indeed, the captain had assurance enough of our resolutions to go, for
that having made such provision to settle there, it did not seem
rational that we would choose to remain here at the expense and peril
of life, for such it must have been if we had been taken again.  In a
word, we went all on shore with the captain, and supped together in
Gravesend, where we were very merry, stayed all night, lay at the house
where we supped, and came all very honestly on board again with him in
the morning.  Here we bought ten dozen bottles of good beer, some wine,
some fowls, and such things as we thought might be acceptable on board.

My governess was with us all this while, and went with us round into
the Downs, as did also the captain's wife, with whom she went back.  I
was never so sorrowful at parting with my own mother as I was at
parting with her, and I never saw her more.  We had a fair easterly
wind sprung up the third day after we came to the Downs, and we sailed
from thence the 10th of April.  Nor did we touch any more at any place,
till, being driven on the coast of Ireland by a very hard gale of wind,
the ship came to an anchor in a little bay, near the mouth of a river,
whose name I remember not, but they said the river came down from
Limerick, and that it was the largest river in Ireland.

Here, being detained by bad weather for some time, the captain, who
continued the same kind, good-humoured man as at first, took us two on
shore with him again.  He did it now in kindness to my husband indeed,
who bore the sea very ill, and was very sick, especially when it blew
so hard.  Here we bought in again a store of fresh provisions,
especially beef, pork, mutton, and fowls, and the captain stayed to
pickle up five or six barrels of beef to lengthen out the ship's store.
We were here not above five days, when the weather turning mild, and a
fair wind, we set sail again, and in two-and-forty days came safe to
the coast of Virginia.

When we drew near to the shore, the captain called me to him, and told
me that he found by my discourse I had some relations in the place, and
that I had been there before, and so he supposed I understood the
custom in their disposing the convict prisoners when they arrived.  I
told him I did not, and that as to what relations I had in the place,
he might be sure I would make myself known to none of them while I was
in the circumstances of a prisoner, and that as to the rest, we left
ourselves entirely to him to assist us, as he was pleased to promise us
he would do.  He told me I must get somebody in the place to come and
buy us as servants, and who must answer for us to the governor of the
country, if he demanded us.  I told him we should do as he should
direct; so he brought a planter to treat with him, as it were, for the
purchase of these two servants, my husband and me, and there we were
formally sold to him, and went ashore with him.  The captain went with
us, and carried us to a certain house, whether it was to be called a
tavern or not I know not, but we had a bowl of punch there made of rum,
etc., and were very merry.  After some time the planter gave us a
certificate of discharge, and an acknowledgment of having served him
faithfully, and we were free from him the next morning, to go wither we
would.

For this piece of service the captain demanded of us six thousand
weight of tabacco, which he said he was accountable for to his
freighter, and which we immediately bought for him, and made him a
present of twenty guineas besides, with which he was abundantly
satisfied.

It is not proper to enter here into the particulars of what part of the
colony of Virginia we settled in, for divers reasons; it may suffice to
mention that we went into the great river Potomac, the ship being bound
thither; and there we intended to have settled first, though afterwards
we altered our minds.

The first thing I did of moment after having gotten all our goods on
shore, and placed them in a storehouse, or warehouse, which, with a
lodging, we hired at the small place or village where we landed--I say,
the first thing was to inquire after my mother, and after my brother
(that fatal person whom I married as a husband, as I have related at
large).  A little inquiry furnished me with information that Mrs. ----,
that is, my mother, was dead; that my brother (or husband) was alive,
which I confess I was not very glad to hear; but which was worse, I
found he was removed from the plantation where he lived formerly, and
where I lived with him, and lived with one of his sons in a plantation
just by the place where we landed, and where we had hired a warehouse.

I was a little surprised at first, but as I ventured to satisfy myself
that he could not know me, I was not only perfectly easy, but had a
great mind to see him, if it was possible to so do without his seeing
me.  In order to that I found out by inquiry the plantation where he
lived, and with a woman of that place whom I got to help me, like what
we call a chairwoman, I rambled about towards the place as if I had
only a mind to see the country and look about me.  At last I came so
near that I saw the dwellinghouse.  I asked the woman whose plantation
that was; she said it belonged to such a man, and looking out a little
to our right hands, 'there,' says she, is the gentleman that owns the
plantation, and his father with him.'  'What are their Christian
names?' said I.  'I know not,' says she, 'what the old gentleman's name
is, but the son's name is Humphrey; and I believe,' says she, 'the
father's is so too.'  You may guess, if you can, what a confused
mixture of joy and fight possessed my thoughts upon this occasion, for
I immediately knew that this was nobody else but my own son, by that
father she showed me, who was my own brother.  I had no mask, but I
ruffled my hood so about my face, that I depended upon it that after
above twenty years' absence, and withal not expecting anything of me in
that part of the world, he would not be able to know anything of me.
But I need not have used all that caution, for the old gentleman was
grown dim-sighted by some distemper which had fallen upon his eyes, and
could but just see well enough to walk about, and not run against a
tree or into a ditch.  The woman that was with me had told me that by a
mere accident, knowing nothing of what importance it was to me.  As
they drew near to us, I said, 'Does he know you, Mrs. Owen?' (so they
called the woman).  'Yes,' said she, 'if he hears me speak, he will
know me; but he can't see well enough to know me or anybody else'; and
so she told me the story of his sight, as I have related.  This made me
secure, and so I threw open my hoods again, and let them pass by me.
It was a wretched thing for a mother thus to see her own son, a
handsome, comely young gentleman in flourishing circumstances, and
durst not make herself known to him, and durst not take any notice of
him.  Let any mother of children that reads this consider it, and but
think with what anguish of mind I restrained myself; what yearnings of
soul I had in me to embrace him, and weep over him; and how I thought
all my entrails turned within me, that my very bowels moved, and I knew
not what to do, as I now know not how to express those agonies!  When
he went from me I stood gazing and trembling, and looking after him as
long as I could see him; then sitting down to rest me, but turned from
her, and lying on my face, wept, and kissed the ground that he had set
his foot on.

I could not conceal my disorder so much from the woman but that she
perceived it, and thought I was not well, which I was obliged to
pretend was true; upon which she pressed me to rise, the ground being
damp and dangerous, which I did accordingly, and walked away.

As I was going back again, and still talking of this gentleman and his
son, a new occasion of melancholy offered itself thus.  The woman
began, as if she would tell me a story to divert me: 'There goes,' says
she, 'a very odd tale among the neighbours where this gentleman
formerly live.'  'What was that?' said I.  'Why,' says she, 'that old
gentleman going to England, when he was a young man, fell in love with
a young lady there, one of the finest women that ever was seen, and
married her, and brought her over hither to his mother who was then
living.  He lived here several years with her,' continued she, 'and had
several children by her, of which the young gentleman that was with him
now was one; but after some time, the old gentlewoman, his mother,
talking to her of something relating to herself when she was in
England, and of her circumstances in England, which were bad enough,
the daughter-in-law began to be very much surprised and uneasy; and, in
short, examining further into things, it appeared past all
contradiction that the old gentlewoman was her own mother, and that
consequently that son was his wife's own brother, which struck the
whole family with horror, and put them into such confusion that it had
almost ruined them all.  The young woman would not live with him; the
son, her brother and husband, for a time went distracted; and at last
the young woman went away for England, and has never been heard of
since.'

It is easy to believe that I was strangely affected with this story,
but 'tis impossible to describe the nature of my disturbance.  I seemed
astonished at the story, and asked her a thousand questions about the
particulars, which I found she was thoroughly acquainted with.  At last
I began to inquire into the circumstances of the family, how the old
gentlewoman, I mean my mother, died, and how she left what she had; for
my mother had promised me very solemnly, that when she died she would
do something for me, and leave it so, as that, if I was living, I
should one way or other come at it, without its being in the power of
her son, my brother and husband, to prevent it.  She told me she did
not know exactly how it was ordered, but she had been told that my
mother had left a sum of money, and had tied her plantation for the
payment of it, to be made good to the daughter, if ever she could be
heard of, either in England or elsewhere; and that the trust was left
with this son, who was the person that we saw with his father.

This was news too good for me to make light of, and, you may be sure,
filled my heart with a thousand thoughts, what course I should take,
how, and when, and in what manner I should make myself known, or
whether I should ever make myself know or no.

Here was a perplexity that I had not indeed skill to manage myself in,
neither knew I what course to take.  It lay heavy upon my mind night
and day.  I could neither sleep nor converse, so that my husband
perceived it, and wondered what ailed me, strove to divert me, but it
was all to no purpose.  He pressed me to tell him what it was troubled
me, but I put it off, till at last, importuning me continually, I was
forced to form a story, which yet had a plain truth to lay it upon too.
I told him I was troubled because I found we must shift our quarters
and alter our scheme of settling, for that I found I should be known if
I stayed in that part of the country; for that my mother being dead,
several of my relations were come into that part where we then was, and
that I must either discover myself to them, which in our present
circumstances was not proper on many accounts, or remove; and which to
do I knew not, and that this it was that made me so melancholy and so
thoughtful.

He joined with me in this, that it was by no means proper for me to
make myself known to anybody in the circumstances in which we then
were; and therefore he told me he would be willing to remove to any
other part of the country, or even to any other country if I thought
fit.  But now I had another difficulty, which was, that if I removed to
any other colony, I put myself out of the way of ever making a due
search after those effects which my mother had left.  Again I could
never so much as think of breaking the secret of my former marriage to
my new husband; it was not a story, as I thought, that would bear
telling, nor could I tell what might be the consequences of it; and it
was impossible to search into the bottom of the thing without making it
public all over the country, as well who I was, as what I now was also.

In this perplexity I continued a great while, and this made my spouse
very uneasy; for he found me perplexed, and yet thought I was not open
with him, and did not let him into every part of my grievance; and he
would often say, he wondered what he had done that I would not trust
him with whatever it was, especially if it was grievous and afflicting.
The truth is, he ought to have been trusted with everything, for no man
in the world could deserve better of a wife; but this was a thing I
knew not how to open to him, and yet having nobody to disclose any part
of it to, the burthen was too heavy for my mind; for let them say what
they please of our sex not being able to keep a secret, my life is a
plain conviction to me of the contrary; but be it our sex, or the man's
sex, a secret of moment should always have a confidant, a bosom friend,
to whom we may communicate the joy of it, or the grief of it, be it
which it will, or it will be a double weight upon the spirits, and
perhaps become even insupportable in itself; and this I appeal to all
human testimony for the truth of.

And this is the cause why many times men as well as women, and men of
the greatest and best qualities other ways, yet have found themselves
weak in this part, and have not been able to bear the weight of a
secret joy or of a secret sorrow, but have been obliged to disclose it,
even for the mere giving vent to themselves, and to unbend the mind
oppressed with the load and weights which attended it.  Nor was this
any token of folly or thoughtlessness at all, but a natural consequence
of the thing; and such people, had they struggled longer with the
oppression, would certainly have told it in their sleep, and disclosed
the secret, let it have been of what fatal nature soever, without
regard to the person to whom it might be exposed.  This necessity of
nature is a thing which works sometimes with such vehemence in the
minds of those who are guilty of any atrocious villainy, such as secret
murder in particular, that they have been obliged to discover it,
though the consequence would necessarily be their own destruction.
Now, though it may be true that the divine justice ought to have the
glory of all those discoveries and confessions, yet 'tis as certain
that Providence, which ordinarily works by the hands of nature, makes
use here of the same natural causes to produce those extraordinary
effects.

I could give several remarkable instances of this in my long
conversation with crime and with criminals.  I knew one fellow that,
while I was in prison in Newgate, was one of those they called then
night-fliers.  I know not what other word they may have understood it
by since, but he was one who by connivance was admitted to go abroad
every evening, when he played his pranks, and furnished those honest
people they call thief-catchers with business to find out the next day,
and restore for a reward what they had stolen the evening before.  This
fellow was as sure to tell in his sleep all that he had done, and every
step he had taken, what he had stolen, and where, as sure as if he had
engaged to tell it waking, and that there was no harm or danger in it,
and therefore he was obliged, after he had been out, to lock himself
up, or be locked up by some of the keepers that had him in fee, that
nobody should hear him; but, on the other hand, if he had told all the
particulars, and given a full account of his rambles and success, to
any comrade, any brother thief, or to his employers, as I may justly
call them, then all was well with him, and he slept as quietly as other
people.

As the publishing this account of my life is for the sake of the just
moral of very part of it, and for instruction, caution, warning, and
improvement to every reader, so this will not pass, I hope, for an
unnecessary digression concerning some people being obliged to disclose
the greatest secrets either of their own or other people's affairs.

Under the certain oppression of this weight upon my mind, I laboured in
the case I have been naming; and the only relief I found for it was to
let my husband into so much of it as I thought would convince him of
the necessity there was for us to think of settling in some other part
of the world; and the next consideration before us was, which part of
the English settlements we should go to.  My husband was a perfect
stranger to the country, and had not yet so much as a geographical
knowledge of the situation of the several places; and I, that, till I
wrote this, did not know what the word geographical signified, had only
a general knowledge from long conversation with people that came from
or went to several places; but this I knew, that Maryland,
Pennsylvania, East and West Jersey, New York, and New England lay all
north of Virginia, and that they were consequently all colder climates,
to which for that very reason, I had an aversion.  For that as I
naturally loved warm weather, so now I grew into years I had a stronger
inclination to shun a cold climate.  I therefore considered of going to
Caroline, which is the only southern colony of the English on the
continent of America, and hither I proposed to go; and the rather
because I might with great ease come from thence at any time, when it
might be proper to inquire after my mother's effects, and to make
myself known enough to demand them.

With this resolution I proposed to my husband our going away from where
we was, and carrying all our effects with us to Caroline, where we
resolved to settle; for my husband readily agreed to the first part,
viz. that was not at all proper to stay where we was, since I had
assured him we should be known there, and the rest I effectually
concealed from him.

But now I found a new difficulty upon me.  The main affair grew heavy
upon my mind still, and I could not think of going out of the country
without somehow or other making inquiry into the grand affair of what
my mother had done for me; nor could I with any patience bear the
thought of going away, and not make myself known to my old husband
(brother), or to my child, his son; only I would fain have had this
done without my new husband having any knowledge of it, or they having
any knowledge of him, or that I had such a thing as a husband.

I cast about innumerable ways in my thoughts how this might be done.  I
would gladly have sent my husband away to Caroline with all our goods,
and have come after myself, but this was impracticable; he would never
stir without me, being himself perfectly unacquainted with the country,
and with the methods of settling there or anywhere else.  Then I
thought we would both go first with part of our goods, and that when we
were settled I should come back to Virginia and fetch the remainder;
but even then I knew he would never part with me, and be left there to
go on alone.  The case was plain; he was bred a gentleman, and by
consequence was not only unacquainted, but indolent, and when we did
settle, would much rather go out into the woods with his gun, which
they call there hunting, and which is the ordinary work of the Indians,
and which they do as servants; I say, he would rather do that than
attend the natural business of his plantation.

These were therefore difficulties insurmountable, and such as I knew
not what to do in.  I had such strong impressions on my mind about
discovering myself to my brother, formerly my husband, that I could not
withstand them; and the rather, because it ran constantly in my
thoughts, that if I did not do it while he lived, I might in vain
endeavour to convince my son afterward that I was really the same
person, and that I was his mother, and so might both lose the
assistance and comfort of the relation, and the benefit of whatever it
was my mother had left me; and yet, on the other hand, I could never
think it proper to discover myself to them in the circumstances I was
in, as well relating to the having a husband with me as to my being
brought over by a legal transportation as a criminal; on both which
accounts it was absolutely necessary to me to remove from the place
where I was, and come again to him, as from another place and in
another figure.

Upon those considerations,  I went on with telling my husband the
absolute necessity there was of our not settling in Potomac River, at
least that we should be presently made public there; whereas if we went
to any other place in the world, we should come in with as much
reputation as any family that came to plant; that, as it was always
agreeable to the inhabitants to have families come among them to plant,
who brought substance with them, either to purchase plantations or
begin new ones, so we should be sure of a kind, agreeable reception,
and that without any possibility of a discovery of our circumstances.

I told him in general, too, that as I had several relations in the
place where we were, and that I durst not now let myself be known to
them, because they would soon come into a knowledge of the occasion and
reason of my coming over, which would be to expose myself to the last
degree, so I had reason to believe that my mother, who died here, had
left me something, and perhaps considerable, which it might be very
well worth my while to inquire after; but that this too could not be
done without exposing us publicly, unless we went from hence; and then,
wherever we settled, I might come, as it were, to visit and to see my
brother and nephews, make myself known to them, claim and inquire after
what was my due, be received with respect, and at the same time have
justice done me with cheerfulness and good will; whereas, if I did it
now, I could expect nothing but with trouble, such as exacting it by
force, receiving it with curses and reluctance, and with all kinds of
affronts, which he would not perhaps bear to see; that in case of being
obliged to legal proofs of being really her daughter, I might be at
loss, be obliged to have recourse to England, and it may be to fail at
last, and so lose it, whatever it might be.  With these arguments, and
having thus acquainted my husband with the whole secret so far as was
needful of him, we resolved to go and seek a settlement in some other
colony, and at first thoughts, Caroline was the place we pitched upon.

In order to this we began to make inquiry for vessels going to
Carolina, and in a very little while got information, that on the other
side the bay, as they call it, namely, in Maryland, there was a ship
which came from Carolina, laden with rice and other goods, and was
going back again thither, and from thence to Jamaica, with provisions.
On this news we hired a sloop to take in our goods, and taking, as it
were, a final farewell of Potomac River, we went with all our cargo
over to Maryland.

This was a long and unpleasant voyage, and my spouse said it was worse
to him than all the voyage from England, because the weather was but
indifferent, the water rough, and the vessel small and inconvenient.
In the next place, we were full a hundred miles up Potomac River, in a
part which they call Westmoreland County, and as that river is by far
the greatest in Virginia, and I have heard say it is the greatest river
in the world that falls into another river, and not directly into the
sea, so we had base weather in it, and were frequently in great danger;
for though we were in the middle, we could not see land on either side
for many leagues together.  Then we had the great river or bay of
Chesapeake to cross, which is where the river Potomac falls into it,
near thirty miles broad, and we entered more great vast waters whose
names I know not, so that our voyage was full two hundred miles, in a
poor, sorry sloop, with all our treasure, and if any accident had
happened to us, we might at last have been very miserable; supposing we
had lost our goods and saved our lives only, and had then been left
naked and destitute, and in a wild, strange place not having one friend
or acquaintance in all that part of the world.  The very thought of it
gives me some horror, even since the danger is past.

Well, we came to the place in five days' sailing; I think they call it
Philip's Point; and behold, when we came thither, the ship bound to
Carolina was loaded and gone away but three days before.  This was a
disappointment; but, however, I, that was to be discouraged with
nothing, told my husband that since we could not get passage to
Caroline, and that the country we was in was very fertile and good, we
would, if he liked of it, see if we could find out anything for our
tune where we was, and that if he liked things we would settle here.

We immediately went on shore, but found no conveniences just at that
place, either for our being on shore or preserving our goods on shore,
but was directed by a very honest Quaker, whom we found there, to go to
a place about sixty miles east; that is to say, nearer the mouth of the
bay, where he said he lived, and where we should be accommodated,
either to plant, or to wait for any other place to plant in that might
be more convenient; and he invited us with so much kindness and simple
honesty, that we agreed to go, and the Quaker himself went with us.

Here we bought us two servants, viz. an English woman-servant just come
on shore from a ship of Liverpool, and a Negro man-servant, things
absolutely necessary for all people that pretended to settle in that
country.  This honest Quaker was very helpful to us, and when we came
to the place that he proposed to us, found us out a convenient
storehouse for our goods, and lodging for ourselves and our servants;
and about two months or thereabouts afterwards, by his direction, we
took up a large piece of land from the governor of that country, in
order to form our plantation, and so we laid the thoughts of going to
Caroline wholly aside, having been very well received here, and
accommodated with a convenient lodging till we could prepare things,
and have land enough cleared, and timber and materials provided for
building us a house, all which we managed by the direction of the
Quaker; so that in one year's time we had nearly fifty acres of land
cleared, part of it enclosed, and some of it planted with tabacco,
though not much; besides, we had garden ground and corn sufficient to
help supply our servants with roots and herbs and bread.

And now I persuaded my husband to let me go over the bay again, and
inquire after my friends.  He was the willinger to consent to it now,
because he had business upon his hands sufficient to employ him,
besides his gun to divert him, which they call hunting there, and which
he greatly delighted in; and indeed we used to look at one another,
sometimes with a great deal of pleasure, reflecting how much better
that was, not than Newgate only, but than the most prosperous of our
circumstances in the wicked trade that we had been both carrying on.

Our affair was in a very good posture; we purchased of the proprietors
of the colony as much land for #35, paid in ready money, as would make
a sufficient plantation to employ between fifty and sixty servants, and
which, being well improved, would be sufficient to us as long as we
could either of us live; and as for children, I was past the prospect
of anything of that kind.

But out good fortune did not end here.  I went, as I have said, over
the bay, to the place where my brother, once a husband, lived; but I
did not go to the same village where I was before, but went up another
great river, on the east side of the river Potomac, called Rappahannock
River, and by this means came on the back of his plantation, which was
large, and by the help of a navigable creek, or little river, that ran
into the Rappahannock, I came very near it.

I was now fully resolved to go up point-blank to my brother (husband),
and to tell him who I was; but not knowing what temper I might find him
in, or how much out of temper rather, I might make him by such a rash
visit, I resolved to write a letter to him first, to let him know who I
was, and that I was come not to give him any trouble upon the old
relation, which I hoped was entirely forgot, but that I applied to him
as a sister to a brother, desiring his assistance in the case of that
provision which our mother, at her decease, had left for my support,
and which I did not doubt but he would do me justice in, especially
considering that I was come thus far to look after it.

I said some very tender, kind things in the letter about his son, which
I told him he knew to be my own child, and that as I was guilty of
nothing in marrying him, any more than he was in marrying me, neither
of us having then known our being at all related to one another, so I
hoped he would allow me the most passionate desire of once seeing my
one and only child, and of showing something of the infirmities of a
mother in preserving a violent affect for him, who had never been able
to retain any thought of me one way or other.

I did believe that, having received this letter, he would immediately
give it to his son to read, I having understood his eyes being so dim,
that he could not see to read it; but it fell out better than so, for
as his sight was dim, so he had allowed his son to open all letters
that came to his hand for him, and the old gentleman being from home,
or out of the way when my messenger came, my letter came directly to my
son's hand, and he opened and read it.

He called the messenger in, after some little stay, and asked him where
the person was who gave him the letter.  The messenger told him the
place, which was about seven miles off, so he bid him stay, and
ordering a horse to be got ready, and two servants, away he came to me
with the messenger.  Let any one judge the consternation I was in when
my messenger came back, and told me the old gentleman was not at home,
but his son was come along with him, and was just coming up to me.  I
was perfectly confounded, for I knew not whether it was peace or war,
nor could I tell how to behave; however, I had but a very few moments
to think, for my son was at the heels of the messenger, and coming up
into my lodgings, asked the fellow at the door something.  I suppose it
was, for I did not hear it so as to understand it, which was the
gentlewoman that sent him; for the messenger said, 'There she is, sir';
at which he comes directly up to me, kisses me, took me in his arms,
and embraced me with so much passion that he could not speak, but I
could feel his breast heave and throb like a child, that cries, but
sobs, and cannot cry it out.

I can neither express nor describe the joy that touched my very soul
when I found, for it was easy to discover that part, that he came not
as a stranger, but as a son to a mother, and indeed as a son who had
never before known what a mother of his own was; in short, we cried
over one another a considerable while, when at last he broke out first.
'My dear mother,' says he, 'are you still alive?  I never expected to
have seen your face.'  As for me, I could say nothing a great while.

After we had both recovered ourselves a little, and were able to talk,
he told me how things stood. As to what I had written to his father, he
told me he had not showed my letter to his father, or told him anything
about it; that what his grandmother left me was in his hands, and that
he would do me justice to my full satisfaction; that as to his father,
he was old and infirm both in body and mind; that he was very fretful
and passionate, almost blind, and capable of nothing; and he questioned
whether he would know how to act in an affair which was of so nice a
nature as this; and that therefore he had come himself, as well to
satisfy himself in seeing me, which he could not restrain himself from,
as also to put it into my power to make a judgment, after I had seen
how things were, whether I would discover myself to his father or no.

This was really so prudently and wisely managed, that I found my son
was a man of sense, and needed no direction from me.  I told him I did
not wonder that his father was as he had described him, for that his
head was a little touched before I went away; and principally his
disturbance was because I could not be persuaded to conceal our
relation and to live with him as my husband, after I knew that he was
my brother; that as he knew better than I what his father's present
condition was, I should readily join with him in such measure as he
would direct; that I was indifferent as to seeing his father, since I
had seen him first, and he could not have told me better news than to
tell me that what his grandmother had left me was entrusted in his
hands, who, I doubted not, now he knew who I was, would, as he said, do
me justice.  I inquired then how long my mother had been dead, and
where she died, and told so many particulars of the family, that I left
him no room to doubt the truth of my being really and truly his mother.

My son then inquired where I was, and how I had disposed myself.  I
told him I was on the Maryland side of the bay, at the plantation of a
particular friend who came from England in the same ship with me; that
as for that side of the bay where he was, I had no habitation.  He told
me I should go home with him, and live with him, if I pleased, as long
as I lived; that as to his father, he knew nobody, and would never so
much as guess at me.  I considered of that a little, and told him, that
though it was really no concern to me to live at a distance from him,
yet I could not say it would be the most comfortable thing in the world
to me to live in the house with him, and to have that unhappy object
always before me, which had been such a blow to my peace before; that
though I should be glad to have his company (my son), or to be as near
him as possible while I stayed, yet I could not think of being in the
house where I should be also under constant restraint for fear of
betraying myself in my discourse, nor should I be able to refrain some
expressions in my conversing with him as my son, that might discover
the whole affair, which would by no means be convenient.

He acknowledged that I was right in all this.  'But then, dear mother,'
says he, 'you shall be as near me as you can.'  So he took me with him
on horseback to a plantation next to his own, and where I was as well
entertained as I could have been in his own.  Having left me there he
went away home, telling me we would talk of the main business the next
day; and having first called me his aunt, and given a charge to the
people, who it seems were his tenants, to treat me with all possible
respect.  About two hours after he was gone, he sent me a maid-servant
and a Negro boy to wait on me, and provisions ready dressed for my
supper; and thus I was as if I had been in a new world, and began
secretly now to wish that I had not brought my Lancashire husband from
England at all.

However, that wish was not hearty neither, for I loved my Lancashire
husband entirely, as indeed I had ever done from the beginning; and he
merited from me as much as it was possible for a man to do; but that by
the way.

The next morning my son came to visit me again almost as soon as I was
up.  After a little discourse, he first of all pulled out a deerskin
bag, and gave it me, with five-and-fifty Spanish pistoles in it, and
told me that was to supply my expenses from England, for though it was
not his business to inquire, yet he ought to think I did not bring a
great deal of money out with me, it not being usual to bring much money
into that country.  Then he pulled out his grandmother's will, and read
it over to me, whereby it appeared that she had left a small
plantation, as he called it, on York River, that is, where my mother
lived, to me, with the stock of servants and cattle upon it, and given
it in trust to this son of mine for my use, whenever he should hear of
my being alive, and to my heirs, if I had any children, and in default
of heirs, to whomsoever I should by will dispose of it; but gave the
income of it, till I should be heard of, or found, to my said son; and
if I should not be living, then it was to him, and his heirs.

This plantation, though remote from him, he said he did not let out,
but managed it by a head-clerk (steward), as he did another that was
his father's, that lay hard by it, and went over himself three or four
times a year to look after it.  I asked him what he thought the
plantation might be worth.  He said, if I would let it out, he would
give me about #60 a year for it; but if I would live on it, then it
would be worth much more, and, he believed, would bring me in about
#150 a year.  But seeing I was likely either to settle on the other
side of the bay, or might perhaps have a mind to go back to England
again, if I would let him be my steward he would manage it for me, as
he had done for himself, and that he believed he should be able to send
me as much tobacco to England from it as would yield me about #100 a
year, sometimes more.

This was all strange news to me, and things I had not been used to; and
really my heart began to look up more seriously than I think it ever
did before, and to look with great thankfulness to the hand of
Providence, which had done such wonders for me, who had been myself the
greatest wonder of wickedness perhaps that had been suffered to live in
the world.  And I must again observe, that not on this occasion only,
but even on all other occasions of thankfulness, my past wicked and
abominable life never looked so monstrous to me, and I never so
completely abhorred it, and reproached myself with it, as when I had a
sense upon me of Providence doing good to me, while I had been making
those vile returns on my part.

But I leave the reader to improve these thoughts, as no doubt they will
see cause, and I go on to the fact.  My son's tender carriage and kind
offers fetched tears from me, almost all the while he talked with me.
Indeed, I could scarce discourse with him but in the intervals of my
passion; however, at length I began, and expressing myself with wonder
at my being so happy to have the trust of what I had left, put into the
hands of my own child, I told him, that as to the inheritance of it, I
had no child but him in the world, and was now past having any if I
should marry, and therefore would desire him to get a writing drawn,
which I was ready to execute, by which I would, after me, give it
wholly to him and to his heirs.  And in the meantime, smiling, I asked
him what made him continue a bachelor so long.  His answer was kind and
ready, that Virginia did not yield any great plenty of wives, and that
since I talked of going back to England, I should send him a wife from
London.

This was the substance of our first day's conversation, the pleasantest
day that ever passed over my head in my life, and which gave me the
truest satisfaction.  He came every day after this, and spent a great
part of his time with me, and carried me about to several of his
friends' houses, where I was entertained with great respect.  Also I
dined several times at his own house, when he took care always to see
his half-dead father so out of the way that I never saw him, or he me.
I made him one present, and it was all I had of value, and that was one
of the gold watches, of which I mentioned above, that I had two in my
chest, and this I happened to have with me, and I gave it him at his
third visit.  I told him I had nothing of any value to bestow but that,
and I desired he would now and then kiss it for my sake.  I did not
indeed tell him that I had stole it from a gentlewoman's side, at a
meeting-house in London.  That's by the way.

He stood a little while hesitating, as if doubtful whether to take it
or no; but I pressed it on him, and made him accept it, and it was not
much less worth than his leather pouch full of Spanish gold; no, though
it were to be reckoned as if at London, whereas it was worth twice as
much there, where I gave it him.  At length he took it, kissed it, told
me the watch should be a debt upon him that he would be paying as long
as I lived.

A few days after he brought the writings of gift, and the scrivener
with them, and I signed them very freely, and delivered them to him
with a hundred kisses; for sure nothing ever passed between a mother
and a tender, dutiful child with more affection.  The next day he
brings me an obligation under his hand and seal, whereby he engaged
himself to manage and improve the plantation for my account, and with
his utmost skill, and to remit the produce to my order wherever I
should be; and withal, to be obliged himself to make up the produce
#100 a year to me.  When he had done so, he told me that as I came to
demand it before the crop was off, I had a right to produce of the
current year, and so he paid me #100 in Spanish pieces of eight, and
desired me to give him a receipt for it as in full for that year,
ending at Christmas following; this being about the latter end of
August.

I stayed here about five weeks, and indeed had much ado to get away
then.  Nay, he would have come over the bay with me, but I would by no
means allow him to it.  However, he would send me over in a sloop of
his own, which was built like a yacht, and served him as well for
pleasure as business.  This I accepted of, and so, after the utmost
expressions both of duty and affection, he let me come away, and I
arrived safe in two days at my friend's the Quaker's.

I brought over with me for the use of our plantation, three horses,
with harness and saddles, some hogs, two cows, and a thousand other
things, the gift of the kindest and tenderest child that ever woman
had.  I related to my husband all the particulars of this voyage,
except that I called my son my cousin; and first I told him that I had
lost my watch, which he seemed to take as a misfortune; but then I told
him how kind my cousin had been, that my mother had left me such a
plantation, and that he had preserved it for me, in hopes some time or
other he should hear from me; then I told him that I had left it to his
management, that he would render me a faithful account of its produce;
and then I pulled him out the #100 in silver, as the first year's
produce; and then pulling out the deerskin purse with the pistoles,
'And here, my dear,' says I, 'is the gold watch.'  My husband--so is
Heaven's goodness sure to work the same effects in all sensible minds
where mercies touch the heart--lifted up both hands, and with an
ecstacy of joy, 'What is God a-doing,' says he, 'for such an ungrateful
dog as I am!'  Then I let him know what I had brought over in the
sloop, besides all this; I mean the horses, hogs, and cows, and other
stores for our plantation; all which added to his surprise, and filled
his heart with thankfulness; and from this time forward I believe he
was as sincere a penitent, and as thoroughly a reformed man, as ever
God's goodness brought back from a profligate, a highwayman, and a
robber.  I could fill a larger history than this with the evidence of
this truth, and but that I doubt that part of the story will not be
equally diverting as the wicked part, I have had thoughts of making a
volume of it by itself.

As for myself, as this is to be my own story, not my husband's, I
return to that part which related to myself.  We went on with our
plantation, and managed it with the help and diversion of such friends
as we got there by our obliging behaviour, and especially the honest
Quaker, who proved a faithful, generous, and steady friend to us; and
we had very good success, for having a flourishing stock to begin with,
as I have said, and this being now increased by the addition of #150
sterling in money, we enlarged our number of servants, built us a very
good house, and cured every year a great deal of land.  The second year
I wrote to my old governess, giving her part with us of the joy of our
success, and order her how to lay out the money I had left with her,
which was #250 as above, and to send it to us in goods, which she
performed with her usual kindness and fidelity, and this arrived safe
to us.

Here we had a supply of all sorts of clothes, as well for my husband as
for myself; and I took especial care to buy for him all those things
that I knew he delighted to have; as two good long wigs, two
silver-hilted swords, three or four fine fowling-pieces, a fine saddle
with holsters and pistols very handsome, with a scarlet cloak; and, in
a word, everything I could think of to oblige him, and to make him
appear, as he really was, a very fine gentleman.  I ordered a good
quantity of such household stuff as we yet wanted, with linen of all
sorts for us both.  As for myself, I wanted very little of clothes or
linen, being very well furnished before.  The rest of my cargo
consisted in iron-work of all sorts, harness for horses, tools, clothes
for servants, and woollen cloth, stuffs, serges, stockings, shoes,
hats, and the like, such as servants wear; and whole pieces also to
make up for servants, all by direction of the Quaker; and all this
cargo arrived safe, and in good condition, with three woman-servants,
lusty wenches, which my old governess had picked for me, suitable
enough to the place, and to the work we had for them to do; one of
which happened to come double, having been got with child by one of the
seamen in the ship, as she owned afterwards, before the ship got so far
as Gravesend; so she brought us a stout boy, about seven months after
her landing.

My husband, you may suppose, was a little surprised at the arriving of
all this cargo from England; and talking with me after he saw the
account of this particular, 'My dear,' says he, 'what is the meaning of
all this?  I fear you will run us too deep in debt:  when shall we be
able to make return for it all?' I smiled, and told him that it was all
paid for; and then I told him, that what our circumstances might expose
us to, I had not taken my whole stock with me, that I had reserved so
much in my friend's hands, which now we were come over safe, and was
settled in a way to live, I had sent for, as he might see.

He was amazed, and stood a while telling upon his fingers, but said
nothing.  At last he began thus:  'Hold, let's see,' says he, telling
upon his fingers still, and first on his thumb; 'there's #246 in money
at first, then two gold watches, diamond rings, and plate,' says he,
upon the forefinger.  Then upon the next finger, 'Here's a plantation
on York River, #100 a year, then #150 in money, then a sloop load of
horses, cows, hogs, and stores'; and so on to the thumb again.  'And
now,' says he, 'a cargo cost #250 in England, and worth here twice the
money.' 'Well,' says I, 'what do you make of all that?'  'Make of it?'
says he; 'why, who says I was deceived when I married a wife in
Lancashire?  I think I have married a fortune, and a very good fortune
too,' says he.

In a word, we were now in very considerable circumstances, and every
year increasing; for our new plantation grew upon our hands insensibly,
and in eight years which we lived upon it, we brought it to such pitch,
that the produce was at least #300 sterling a year; I mean, worth so
much in England.

After I had been a year at home again, I went over the bay to see my
son, and to receive another year's income of my plantation; and I was
surprised to hear, just at my landing there, that my old husband was
dead, and had not been buried above a fortnight.  This, I confess, was
not disagreeable news, because now I could appear as I was, in a
married condition; so I told my son before I came from him, that I
believed I should marry a gentleman who had a plantation near mine; and
though I was legally free to marry, as to any obligation that was on me
before, yet that I was shy of it, lest the blot should some time or
other be revived, and it might make a husband uneasy.  My son, the same
kind, dutiful, and obliging creature as ever, treated me now at his own
house, paid me my hundred pounds, and sent me home again loaded with
presents.

Some time after this, I let my son know I was married, and invited him
over to see us, and my husband wrote a very obliging letter to him
also, inviting him to come and see him; and he came accordingly some
months after, and happened to be there just when my cargo from England
came in, which I let him believe belonged all to my husband's estate,
not to me.

It must be observed that when the old wretch my brother (husband) was
dead, I then freely gave my husband an account of all that affair, and
of this cousin, as I had called him before, being my own son by that
mistaken unhappy match.  He was perfectly easy in the account, and told
me he should have been as easy if the old man, as we called him, had
been alive.  'For,' said he, 'it was no fault of yours, nor of his; it
was a mistake impossible to be prevented.'  He only reproached him with
desiring me to conceal it, and to live with him as a wife, after I knew
that he was my brother; that, he said, was a vile part.  Thus all these
difficulties were made easy, and we lived together with the greatest
kindness and comfort imaginable.

We are grown old; I am come back to England, being almost seventy years
of age, husband sixty-eight, having performed much more than the
limited terms of my transportation; and now, notwithstanding all the
fatigues and all the miseries we have both gone through, we are both of
us in good heart and health.  My husband remained there some time after
me to settle our affairs, and at first I had intended to go back to
him, but at his desire I altered that resolution, and he is come over
to England also, where we resolve to spend the remainder of our years
in sincere penitence for the wicked lives we have lived.

WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1683

                                  The
                           Life and Adventures
                                    of
                             Robinson Crusoe


                                    By
                               Daniel Defoe

                                * * * * *

                   _With Illustrations by H. M. Brock_

                                * * * * *

                                  London
                      Seeley, Service & Co. Limited
                         38 Great Russell Street




CHAPTER I—START IN LIFE


I was born in the year 1632, in the city of York, of a good family,
though not of that country, my father being a foreigner of Bremen, who
settled first at Hull.  He got a good estate by merchandise, and leaving
off his trade, lived afterwards at York, from whence he had married my
mother, whose relations were named Robinson, a very good family in that
country, and from whom I was called Robinson Kreutznaer; but, by the
usual corruption of words in England, we are now called—nay we call
ourselves and write our name—Crusoe; and so my companions always called
me.

I had two elder brothers, one of whom was lieutenant-colonel to an
English regiment of foot in Flanders, formerly commanded by the famous
Colonel Lockhart, and was killed at the battle near Dunkirk against the
Spaniards.  What became of my second brother I never knew, any more than
my father or mother knew what became of me.

Being the third son of the family and not bred to any trade, my head
began to be filled very early with rambling thoughts.  My father, who was
very ancient, had given me a competent share of learning, as far as
house-education and a country free school generally go, and designed me
for the law; but I would be satisfied with nothing but going to sea; and
my inclination to this led me so strongly against the will, nay, the
commands of my father, and against all the entreaties and persuasions of
my mother and other friends, that there seemed to be something fatal in
that propensity of nature, tending directly to the life of misery which
was to befall me.

My father, a wise and grave man, gave me serious and excellent counsel
against what he foresaw was my design.  He called me one morning into his
chamber, where he was confined by the gout, and expostulated very warmly
with me upon this subject.  He asked me what reasons, more than a mere
wandering inclination, I had for leaving father’s house and my native
country, where I might be well introduced, and had a prospect of raising
my fortune by application and industry, with a life of ease and pleasure.
He told me it was men of desperate fortunes on one hand, or of aspiring,
superior fortunes on the other, who went abroad upon adventures, to rise
by enterprise, and make themselves famous in undertakings of a nature out
of the common road; that these things were all either too far above me or
too far below me; that mine was the middle state, or what might be called
the upper station of low life, which he had found, by long experience,
was the best state in the world, the most suited to human happiness, not
exposed to the miseries and hardships, the labour and sufferings of the
mechanic part of mankind, and not embarrassed with the pride, luxury,
ambition, and envy of the upper part of mankind.  He told me I might
judge of the happiness of this state by this one thing—viz. that this was
the state of life which all other people envied; that kings have
frequently lamented the miserable consequence of being born to great
things, and wished they had been placed in the middle of the two
extremes, between the mean and the great; that the wise man gave his
testimony to this, as the standard of felicity, when he prayed to have
neither poverty nor riches.

He bade me observe it, and I should always find that the calamities of
life were shared among the upper and lower part of mankind, but that the
middle station had the fewest disasters, and was not exposed to so many
vicissitudes as the higher or lower part of mankind; nay, they were not
subjected to so many distempers and uneasinesses, either of body or mind,
as those were who, by vicious living, luxury, and extravagances on the
one hand, or by hard labour, want of necessaries, and mean or
insufficient diet on the other hand, bring distemper upon themselves by
the natural consequences of their way of living; that the middle station
of life was calculated for all kind of virtue and all kind of enjoyments;
that peace and plenty were the handmaids of a middle fortune; that
temperance, moderation, quietness, health, society, all agreeable
diversions, and all desirable pleasures, were the blessings attending the
middle station of life; that this way men went silently and smoothly
through the world, and comfortably out of it, not embarrassed with the
labours of the hands or of the head, not sold to a life of slavery for
daily bread, nor harassed with perplexed circumstances, which rob the
soul of peace and the body of rest, nor enraged with the passion of envy,
or the secret burning lust of ambition for great things; but, in easy
circumstances, sliding gently through the world, and sensibly tasting the
sweets of living, without the bitter; feeling that they are happy, and
learning by every day’s experience to know it more sensibly.

After this he pressed me earnestly, and in the most affectionate manner,
not to play the young man, nor to precipitate myself into miseries which
nature, and the station of life I was born in, seemed to have provided
against; that I was under no necessity of seeking my bread; that he would
do well for me, and endeavour to enter me fairly into the station of life
which he had just been recommending to me; and that if I was not very
easy and happy in the world, it must be my mere fate or fault that must
hinder it; and that he should have nothing to answer for, having thus
discharged his duty in warning me against measures which he knew would be
to my hurt; in a word, that as he would do very kind things for me if I
would stay and settle at home as he directed, so he would not have so
much hand in my misfortunes as to give me any encouragement to go away;
and to close all, he told me I had my elder brother for an example, to
whom he had used the same earnest persuasions to keep him from going into
the Low Country wars, but could not prevail, his young desires prompting
him to run into the army, where he was killed; and though he said he
would not cease to pray for me, yet he would venture to say to me, that
if I did take this foolish step, God would not bless me, and I should
have leisure hereafter to reflect upon having neglected his counsel when
there might be none to assist in my recovery.

I observed in this last part of his discourse, which was truly prophetic,
though I suppose my father did not know it to be so himself—I say, I
observed the tears run down his face very plentifully, especially when he
spoke of my brother who was killed: and that when he spoke of my having
leisure to repent, and none to assist me, he was so moved that he broke
off the discourse, and told me his heart was so full he could say no more
to me.

I was sincerely affected with this discourse, and, indeed, who could be
otherwise? and I resolved not to think of going abroad any more, but to
settle at home according to my father’s desire.  But alas! a few days
wore it all off; and, in short, to prevent any of my father’s further
importunities, in a few weeks after I resolved to run quite away from
him.  However, I did not act quite so hastily as the first heat of my
resolution prompted; but I took my mother at a time when I thought her a
little more pleasant than ordinary, and told her that my thoughts were so
entirely bent upon seeing the world that I should never settle to
anything with resolution enough to go through with it, and my father had
better give me his consent than force me to go without it; that I was now
eighteen years old, which was too late to go apprentice to a trade or
clerk to an attorney; that I was sure if I did I should never serve out
my time, but I should certainly run away from my master before my time
was out, and go to sea; and if she would speak to my father to let me go
one voyage abroad, if I came home again, and did not like it, I would go
no more; and I would promise, by a double diligence, to recover the time
that I had lost.

This put my mother into a great passion; she told me she knew it would be
to no purpose to speak to my father upon any such subject; that he knew
too well what was my interest to give his consent to anything so much for
my hurt; and that she wondered how I could think of any such thing after
the discourse I had had with my father, and such kind and tender
expressions as she knew my father had used to me; and that, in short, if
I would ruin myself, there was no help for me; but I might depend I
should never have their consent to it; that for her part she would not
have so much hand in my destruction; and I should never have it to say
that my mother was willing when my father was not.

Though my mother refused to move it to my father, yet I heard afterwards
that she reported all the discourse to him, and that my father, after
showing a great concern at it, said to her, with a sigh, “That boy might
be happy if he would stay at home; but if he goes abroad, he will be the
most miserable wretch that ever was born: I can give no consent to it.”

It was not till almost a year after this that I broke loose, though, in
the meantime, I continued obstinately deaf to all proposals of settling
to business, and frequently expostulated with my father and mother about
their being so positively determined against what they knew my
inclinations prompted me to.  But being one day at Hull, where I went
casually, and without any purpose of making an elopement at that time;
but, I say, being there, and one of my companions being about to sail to
London in his father’s ship, and prompting me to go with them with the
common allurement of seafaring men, that it should cost me nothing for my
passage, I consulted neither father nor mother any more, nor so much as
sent them word of it; but leaving them to hear of it as they might,
without asking God’s blessing or my father’s, without any consideration
of circumstances or consequences, and in an ill hour, God knows, on the
1st of September 1651, I went on board a ship bound for London.  Never
any young adventurer’s misfortunes, I believe, began sooner, or continued
longer than mine.  The ship was no sooner out of the Humber than the wind
began to blow and the sea to rise in a most frightful manner; and, as I
had never been at sea before, I was most inexpressibly sick in body and
terrified in mind.  I began now seriously to reflect upon what I had
done, and how justly I was overtaken by the judgment of Heaven for my
wicked leaving my father’s house, and abandoning my duty.  All the good
counsels of my parents, my father’s tears and my mother’s entreaties,
came now fresh into my mind; and my conscience, which was not yet come to
the pitch of hardness to which it has since, reproached me with the
contempt of advice, and the breach of my duty to God and my father.

All this while the storm increased, and the sea went very high, though
nothing like what I have seen many times since; no, nor what I saw a few
days after; but it was enough to affect me then, who was but a young
sailor, and had never known anything of the matter.  I expected every
wave would have swallowed us up, and that every time the ship fell down,
as I thought it did, in the trough or hollow of the sea, we should never
rise more; in this agony of mind, I made many vows and resolutions that
if it would please God to spare my life in this one voyage, if ever I got
once my foot upon dry land again, I would go directly home to my father,
and never set it into a ship again while I lived; that I would take his
advice, and never run myself into such miseries as these any more.  Now I
saw plainly the goodness of his observations about the middle station of
life, how easy, how comfortably he had lived all his days, and never had
been exposed to tempests at sea or troubles on shore; and I resolved that
I would, like a true repenting prodigal, go home to my father.

These wise and sober thoughts continued all the while the storm lasted,
and indeed some time after; but the next day the wind was abated, and the
sea calmer, and I began to be a little inured to it; however, I was very
grave for all that day, being also a little sea-sick still; but towards
night the weather cleared up, the wind was quite over, and a charming
fine evening followed; the sun went down perfectly clear, and rose so the
next morning; and having little or no wind, and a smooth sea, the sun
shining upon it, the sight was, as I thought, the most delightful that
ever I saw.

I had slept well in the night, and was now no more sea-sick, but very
cheerful, looking with wonder upon the sea that was so rough and terrible
the day before, and could be so calm and so pleasant in so little a time
after.  And now, lest my good resolutions should continue, my companion,
who had enticed me away, comes to me; “Well, Bob,” says he, clapping me
upon the shoulder, “how do you do after it?  I warrant you were frighted,
wer’n’t you, last night, when it blew but a capful of wind?”  “A capful
d’you call it?” said I; “’twas a terrible storm.”  “A storm, you fool
you,” replies he; “do you call that a storm? why, it was nothing at all;
give us but a good ship and sea-room, and we think nothing of such a
squall of wind as that; but you’re but a fresh-water sailor, Bob.  Come,
let us make a bowl of punch, and we’ll forget all that; d’ye see what
charming weather ’tis now?”  To make short this sad part of my story, we
went the way of all sailors; the punch was made and I was made half drunk
with it: and in that one night’s wickedness I drowned all my repentance,
all my reflections upon my past conduct, all my resolutions for the
future.  In a word, as the sea was returned to its smoothness of surface
and settled calmness by the abatement of that storm, so the hurry of my
thoughts being over, my fears and apprehensions of being swallowed up by
the sea being forgotten, and the current of my former desires returned, I
entirely forgot the vows and promises that I made in my distress.  I
found, indeed, some intervals of reflection; and the serious thoughts
did, as it were, endeavour to return again sometimes; but I shook them
off, and roused myself from them as it were from a distemper, and
applying myself to drinking and company, soon mastered the return of
those fits—for so I called them; and I had in five or six days got as
complete a victory over conscience as any young fellow that resolved not
to be troubled with it could desire.  But I was to have another trial for
it still; and Providence, as in such cases generally it does, resolved to
leave me entirely without excuse; for if I would not take this for a
deliverance, the next was to be such a one as the worst and most hardened
wretch among us would confess both the danger and the mercy of.

The sixth day of our being at sea we came into Yarmouth Roads; the wind
having been contrary and the weather calm, we had made but little way
since the storm.  Here we were obliged to come to an anchor, and here we
lay, the wind continuing contrary—viz. at south-west—for seven or eight
days, during which time a great many ships from Newcastle came into the
same Roads, as the common harbour where the ships might wait for a wind
for the river.

We had not, however, rid here so long but we should have tided it up the
river, but that the wind blew too fresh, and after we had lain four or
five days, blew very hard.  However, the Roads being reckoned as good as
a harbour, the anchorage good, and our ground-tackle very strong, our men
were unconcerned, and not in the least apprehensive of danger, but spent
the time in rest and mirth, after the manner of the sea; but the eighth
day, in the morning, the wind increased, and we had all hands at work to
strike our topmasts, and make everything snug and close, that the ship
might ride as easy as possible.  By noon the sea went very high indeed,
and our ship rode forecastle in, shipped several seas, and we thought
once or twice our anchor had come home; upon which our master ordered out
the sheet-anchor, so that we rode with two anchors ahead, and the cables
veered out to the bitter end.

By this time it blew a terrible storm indeed; and now I began to see
terror and amazement in the faces even of the seamen themselves.  The
master, though vigilant in the business of preserving the ship, yet as he
went in and out of his cabin by me, I could hear him softly to himself
say, several times, “Lord be merciful to us! we shall be all lost! we
shall be all undone!” and the like.  During these first hurries I was
stupid, lying still in my cabin, which was in the steerage, and cannot
describe my temper: I could ill resume the first penitence which I had so
apparently trampled upon and hardened myself against: I thought the
bitterness of death had been past, and that this would be nothing like
the first; but when the master himself came by me, as I said just now,
and said we should be all lost, I was dreadfully frighted.  I got up out
of my cabin and looked out; but such a dismal sight I never saw: the sea
ran mountains high, and broke upon us every three or four minutes; when I
could look about, I could see nothing but distress round us; two ships
that rode near us, we found, had cut their masts by the board, being deep
laden; and our men cried out that a ship which rode about a mile ahead of
us was foundered.  Two more ships, being driven from their anchors, were
run out of the Roads to sea, at all adventures, and that with not a mast
standing.  The light ships fared the best, as not so much labouring in
the sea; but two or three of them drove, and came close by us, running
away with only their spritsail out before the wind.

Towards evening the mate and boatswain begged the master of our ship to
let them cut away the fore-mast, which he was very unwilling to do; but
the boatswain protesting to him that if he did not the ship would
founder, he consented; and when they had cut away the fore-mast, the
main-mast stood so loose, and shook the ship so much, they were obliged
to cut that away also, and make a clear deck.

Any one may judge what a condition I must be in at all this, who was but
a young sailor, and who had been in such a fright before at but a little.
But if I can express at this distance the thoughts I had about me at that
time, I was in tenfold more horror of mind upon account of my former
convictions, and the having returned from them to the resolutions I had
wickedly taken at first, than I was at death itself; and these, added to
the terror of the storm, put me into such a condition that I can by no
words describe it.  But the worst was not come yet; the storm continued
with such fury that the seamen themselves acknowledged they had never
seen a worse.  We had a good ship, but she was deep laden, and wallowed
in the sea, so that the seamen every now and then cried out she would
founder.  It was my advantage in one respect, that I did not know what
they meant by _founder_ till I inquired.  However, the storm was so
violent that I saw, what is not often seen, the master, the boatswain,
and some others more sensible than the rest, at their prayers, and
expecting every moment when the ship would go to the bottom.  In the
middle of the night, and under all the rest of our distresses, one of the
men that had been down to see cried out we had sprung a leak; another
said there was four feet water in the hold.  Then all hands were called
to the pump.  At that word, my heart, as I thought, died within me: and I
fell backwards upon the side of my bed where I sat, into the cabin.
However, the men roused me, and told me that I, that was able to do
nothing before, was as well able to pump as another; at which I stirred
up and went to the pump, and worked very heartily.  While this was doing
the master, seeing some light colliers, who, not able to ride out the
storm were obliged to slip and run away to sea, and would come near us,
ordered to fire a gun as a signal of distress.  I, who knew nothing what
they meant, thought the ship had broken, or some dreadful thing happened.
In a word, I was so surprised that I fell down in a swoon.  As this was a
time when everybody had his own life to think of, nobody minded me, or
what was become of me; but another man stepped up to the pump, and
thrusting me aside with his foot, let me lie, thinking I had been dead;
and it was a great while before I came to myself.

We worked on; but the water increasing in the hold, it was apparent that
the ship would founder; and though the storm began to abate a little, yet
it was not possible she could swim till we might run into any port; so
the master continued firing guns for help; and a light ship, who had rid
it out just ahead of us, ventured a boat out to help us.  It was with the
utmost hazard the boat came near us; but it was impossible for us to get
on board, or for the boat to lie near the ship’s side, till at last the
men rowing very heartily, and venturing their lives to save ours, our men
cast them a rope over the stern with a buoy to it, and then veered it out
a great length, which they, after much labour and hazard, took hold of,
and we hauled them close under our stern, and got all into their boat.
It was to no purpose for them or us, after we were in the boat, to think
of reaching their own ship; so all agreed to let her drive, and only to
pull her in towards shore as much as we could; and our master promised
them, that if the boat was staved upon shore, he would make it good to
their master: so partly rowing and partly driving, our boat went away to
the northward, sloping towards the shore almost as far as Winterton Ness.

We were not much more than a quarter of an hour out of our ship till we
saw her sink, and then I understood for the first time what was meant by
a ship foundering in the sea.  I must acknowledge I had hardly eyes to
look up when the seamen told me she was sinking; for from the moment that
they rather put me into the boat than that I might be said to go in, my
heart was, as it were, dead within me, partly with fright, partly with
horror of mind, and the thoughts of what was yet before me.

While we were in this condition—the men yet labouring at the oar to bring
the boat near the shore—we could see (when, our boat mounting the waves,
we were able to see the shore) a great many people running along the
strand to assist us when we should come near; but we made but slow way
towards the shore; nor were we able to reach the shore till, being past
the lighthouse at Winterton, the shore falls off to the westward towards
Cromer, and so the land broke off a little the violence of the wind.
Here we got in, and though not without much difficulty, got all safe on
shore, and walked afterwards on foot to Yarmouth, where, as unfortunate
men, we were used with great humanity, as well by the magistrates of the
town, who assigned us good quarters, as by particular merchants and
owners of ships, and had money given us sufficient to carry us either to
London or back to Hull as we thought fit.

Had I now had the sense to have gone back to Hull, and have gone home, I
had been happy, and my father, as in our blessed Saviour’s parable, had
even killed the fatted calf for me; for hearing the ship I went away in
was cast away in Yarmouth Roads, it was a great while before he had any
assurances that I was not drowned.

But my ill fate pushed me on now with an obstinacy that nothing could
resist; and though I had several times loud calls from my reason and my
more composed judgment to go home, yet I had no power to do it.  I know
not what to call this, nor will I urge that it is a secret overruling
decree, that hurries us on to be the instruments of our own destruction,
even though it be before us, and that we rush upon it with our eyes open.
Certainly, nothing but some such decreed unavoidable misery, which it was
impossible for me to escape, could have pushed me forward against the
calm reasonings and persuasions of my most retired thoughts, and against
two such visible instructions as I had met with in my first attempt.

My comrade, who had helped to harden me before, and who was the master’s
son, was now less forward than I.  The first time he spoke to me after we
were at Yarmouth, which was not till two or three days, for we were
separated in the town to several quarters; I say, the first time he saw
me, it appeared his tone was altered; and, looking very melancholy, and
shaking his head, he asked me how I did, and telling his father who I
was, and how I had come this voyage only for a trial, in order to go
further abroad, his father, turning to me with a very grave and concerned
tone “Young man,” says he, “you ought never to go to sea any more; you
ought to take this for a plain and visible token that you are not to be a
seafaring man.”  “Why, sir,” said I, “will you go to sea no more?”  “That
is another case,” said he; “it is my calling, and therefore my duty; but
as you made this voyage on trial, you see what a taste Heaven has given
you of what you are to expect if you persist.  Perhaps this has all
befallen us on your account, like Jonah in the ship of Tarshish.  Pray,”
continues he, “what are you; and on what account did you go to sea?”
Upon that I told him some of my story; at the end of which he burst out
into a strange kind of passion: “What had I done,” says he, “that such an
unhappy wretch should come into my ship?  I would not set my foot in the
same ship with thee again for a thousand pounds.”  This indeed was, as I
said, an excursion of his spirits, which were yet agitated by the sense
of his loss, and was farther than he could have authority to go.
However, he afterwards talked very gravely to me, exhorting me to go back
to my father, and not tempt Providence to my ruin, telling me I might see
a visible hand of Heaven against me.  “And, young man,” said he, “depend
upon it, if you do not go back, wherever you go, you will meet with
nothing but disasters and disappointments, till your father’s words are
fulfilled upon you.”

We parted soon after; for I made him little answer, and I saw him no
more; which way he went I knew not.  As for me, having some money in my
pocket, I travelled to London by land; and there, as well as on the road,
had many struggles with myself what course of life I should take, and
whether I should go home or to sea.

As to going home, shame opposed the best motions that offered to my
thoughts, and it immediately occurred to me how I should be laughed at
among the neighbours, and should be ashamed to see, not my father and
mother only, but even everybody else; from whence I have since often
observed, how incongruous and irrational the common temper of mankind is,
especially of youth, to that reason which ought to guide them in such
cases—viz. that they are not ashamed to sin, and yet are ashamed to
repent; not ashamed of the action for which they ought justly to be
esteemed fools, but are ashamed of the returning, which only can make
them be esteemed wise men.

In this state of life, however, I remained some time, uncertain what
measures to take, and what course of life to lead.  An irresistible
reluctance continued to going home; and as I stayed away a while, the
remembrance of the distress I had been in wore off, and as that abated,
the little motion I had in my desires to return wore off with it, till at
last I quite laid aside the thoughts of it, and looked out for a voyage.




CHAPTER II—SLAVERY AND ESCAPE


That evil influence which carried me first away from my father’s
house—which hurried me into the wild and indigested notion of raising my
fortune, and that impressed those conceits so forcibly upon me as to make
me deaf to all good advice, and to the entreaties and even the commands
of my father—I say, the same influence, whatever it was, presented the
most unfortunate of all enterprises to my view; and I went on board a
vessel bound to the coast of Africa; or, as our sailors vulgarly called
it, a voyage to Guinea.

It was my great misfortune that in all these adventures I did not ship
myself as a sailor; when, though I might indeed have worked a little
harder than ordinary, yet at the same time I should have learnt the duty
and office of a fore-mast man, and in time might have qualified myself
for a mate or lieutenant, if not for a master.  But as it was always my
fate to choose for the worse, so I did here; for having money in my
pocket and good clothes upon my back, I would always go on board in the
habit of a gentleman; and so I neither had any business in the ship, nor
learned to do any.

It was my lot first of all to fall into pretty good company in London,
which does not always happen to such loose and misguided young fellows as
I then was; the devil generally not omitting to lay some snare for them
very early; but it was not so with me.  I first got acquainted with the
master of a ship who had been on the coast of Guinea; and who, having had
very good success there, was resolved to go again.  This captain taking a
fancy to my conversation, which was not at all disagreeable at that time,
hearing me say I had a mind to see the world, told me if I would go the
voyage with him I should be at no expense; I should be his messmate and
his companion; and if I could carry anything with me, I should have all
the advantage of it that the trade would admit; and perhaps I might meet
with some encouragement.

I embraced the offer; and entering into a strict friendship with this
captain, who was an honest, plain-dealing man, I went the voyage with
him, and carried a small adventure with me, which, by the disinterested
honesty of my friend the captain, I increased very considerably; for I
carried about £40 in such toys and trifles as the captain directed me to
buy.  These £40 I had mustered together by the assistance of some of my
relations whom I corresponded with; and who, I believe, got my father, or
at least my mother, to contribute so much as that to my first adventure.

This was the only voyage which I may say was successful in all my
adventures, which I owe to the integrity and honesty of my friend the
captain; under whom also I got a competent knowledge of the mathematics
and the rules of navigation, learned how to keep an account of the ship’s
course, take an observation, and, in short, to understand some things
that were needful to be understood by a sailor; for, as he took delight
to instruct me, I took delight to learn; and, in a word, this voyage made
me both a sailor and a merchant; for I brought home five pounds nine
ounces of gold-dust for my adventure, which yielded me in London, at my
return, almost £300; and this filled me with those aspiring thoughts
which have since so completed my ruin.

Yet even in this voyage I had my misfortunes too; particularly, that I
was continually sick, being thrown into a violent calenture by the
excessive heat of the climate; our principal trading being upon the
coast, from latitude of 15 degrees north even to the line itself.

I was now set up for a Guinea trader; and my friend, to my great
misfortune, dying soon after his arrival, I resolved to go the same
voyage again, and I embarked in the same vessel with one who was his mate
in the former voyage, and had now got the command of the ship.  This was
the unhappiest voyage that ever man made; for though I did not carry
quite £100 of my new-gained wealth, so that I had £200 left, which I had
lodged with my friend’s widow, who was very just to me, yet I fell into
terrible misfortunes.  The first was this: our ship making her course
towards the Canary Islands, or rather between those islands and the
African shore, was surprised in the grey of the morning by a Turkish
rover of Sallee, who gave chase to us with all the sail she could make.
We crowded also as much canvas as our yards would spread, or our masts
carry, to get clear; but finding the pirate gained upon us, and would
certainly come up with us in a few hours, we prepared to fight; our ship
having twelve guns, and the rogue eighteen.  About three in the afternoon
he came up with us, and bringing to, by mistake, just athwart our
quarter, instead of athwart our stern, as he intended, we brought eight
of our guns to bear on that side, and poured in a broadside upon him,
which made him sheer off again, after returning our fire, and pouring in
also his small shot from near two hundred men which he had on board.
However, we had not a man touched, all our men keeping close.  He
prepared to attack us again, and we to defend ourselves.  But laying us
on board the next time upon our other quarter, he entered sixty men upon
our decks, who immediately fell to cutting and hacking the sails and
rigging.  We plied them with small shot, half-pikes, powder-chests, and
such like, and cleared our deck of them twice.  However, to cut short
this melancholy part of our story, our ship being disabled, and three of
our men killed, and eight wounded, we were obliged to yield, and were
carried all prisoners into Sallee, a port belonging to the Moors.

The usage I had there was not so dreadful as at first I apprehended; nor
was I carried up the country to the emperor’s court, as the rest of our
men were, but was kept by the captain of the rover as his proper prize,
and made his slave, being young and nimble, and fit for his business.  At
this surprising change of my circumstances, from a merchant to a
miserable slave, I was perfectly overwhelmed; and now I looked back upon
my father’s prophetic discourse to me, that I should be miserable and
have none to relieve me, which I thought was now so effectually brought
to pass that I could not be worse; for now the hand of Heaven had
overtaken me, and I was undone without redemption; but, alas! this was
but a taste of the misery I was to go through, as will appear in the
sequel of this story.

As my new patron, or master, had taken me home to his house, so I was in
hopes that he would take me with him when he went to sea again, believing
that it would some time or other be his fate to be taken by a Spanish or
Portugal man-of-war; and that then I should be set at liberty.  But this
hope of mine was soon taken away; for when he went to sea, he left me on
shore to look after his little garden, and do the common drudgery of
slaves about his house; and when he came home again from his cruise, he
ordered me to lie in the cabin to look after the ship.

Here I meditated nothing but my escape, and what method I might take to
effect it, but found no way that had the least probability in it; nothing
presented to make the supposition of it rational; for I had nobody to
communicate it to that would embark with me—no fellow-slave, no
Englishman, Irishman, or Scotchman there but myself; so that for two
years, though I often pleased myself with the imagination, yet I never
had the least encouraging prospect of putting it in practice.

After about two years, an odd circumstance presented itself, which put
the old thought of making some attempt for my liberty again in my head.
My patron lying at home longer than usual without fitting out his ship,
which, as I heard, was for want of money, he used constantly, once or
twice a week, sometimes oftener if the weather was fair, to take the
ship’s pinnace and go out into the road a-fishing; and as he always took
me and young Maresco with him to row the boat, we made him very merry,
and I proved very dexterous in catching fish; insomuch that sometimes he
would send me with a Moor, one of his kinsmen, and the youth—the Maresco,
as they called him—to catch a dish of fish for him.

It happened one time, that going a-fishing in a calm morning, a fog rose
so thick that, though we were not half a league from the shore, we lost
sight of it; and rowing we knew not whither or which way, we laboured all
day, and all the next night; and when the morning came we found we had
pulled off to sea instead of pulling in for the shore; and that we were
at least two leagues from the shore.  However, we got well in again,
though with a great deal of labour and some danger; for the wind began to
blow pretty fresh in the morning; but we were all very hungry.

But our patron, warned by this disaster, resolved to take more care of
himself for the future; and having lying by him the longboat of our
English ship that he had taken, he resolved he would not go a-fishing any
more without a compass and some provision; so he ordered the carpenter of
his ship, who also was an English slave, to build a little state-room, or
cabin, in the middle of the long-boat, like that of a barge, with a place
to stand behind it to steer, and haul home the main-sheet; the room
before for a hand or two to stand and work the sails.  She sailed with
what we call a shoulder-of-mutton sail; and the boom jibed over the top
of the cabin, which lay very snug and low, and had in it room for him to
lie, with a slave or two, and a table to eat on, with some small lockers
to put in some bottles of such liquor as he thought fit to drink; and his
bread, rice, and coffee.

We went frequently out with this boat a-fishing; and as I was most
dexterous to catch fish for him, he never went without me.  It happened
that he had appointed to go out in this boat, either for pleasure or for
fish, with two or three Moors of some distinction in that place, and for
whom he had provided extraordinarily, and had, therefore, sent on board
the boat overnight a larger store of provisions than ordinary; and had
ordered me to get ready three fusees with powder and shot, which were on
board his ship, for that they designed some sport of fowling as well as
fishing.

I got all things ready as he had directed, and waited the next morning
with the boat washed clean, her ancient and pendants out, and everything
to accommodate his guests; when by-and-by my patron came on board alone,
and told me his guests had put off going from some business that fell
out, and ordered me, with the man and boy, as usual, to go out with the
boat and catch them some fish, for that his friends were to sup at his
house, and commanded that as soon as I got some fish I should bring it
home to his house; all which I prepared to do.

This moment my former notions of deliverance darted into my thoughts, for
now I found I was likely to have a little ship at my command; and my
master being gone, I prepared to furnish myself, not for fishing
business, but for a voyage; though I knew not, neither did I so much as
consider, whither I should steer—anywhere to get out of that place was my
desire.

My first contrivance was to make a pretence to speak to this Moor, to get
something for our subsistence on board; for I told him we must not
presume to eat of our patron’s bread.  He said that was true; so he
brought a large basket of rusk or biscuit, and three jars of fresh water,
into the boat.  I knew where my patron’s case of bottles stood, which it
was evident, by the make, were taken out of some English prize, and I
conveyed them into the boat while the Moor was on shore, as if they had
been there before for our master.  I conveyed also a great lump of
beeswax into the boat, which weighed about half a hundred-weight, with a
parcel of twine or thread, a hatchet, a saw, and a hammer, all of which
were of great use to us afterwards, especially the wax, to make candles.
Another trick I tried upon him, which he innocently came into also: his
name was Ismael, which they call Muley, or Moely; so I called to
him—“Moely,” said I, “our patron’s guns are on board the boat; can you
not get a little powder and shot?  It may be we may kill some alcamies (a
fowl like our curlews) for ourselves, for I know he keeps the gunner’s
stores in the ship.”  “Yes,” says he, “I’ll bring some;” and accordingly
he brought a great leather pouch, which held a pound and a half of
powder, or rather more; and another with shot, that had five or six
pounds, with some bullets, and put all into the boat.  At the same time I
had found some powder of my master’s in the great cabin, with which I
filled one of the large bottles in the case, which was almost empty,
pouring what was in it into another; and thus furnished with everything
needful, we sailed out of the port to fish.  The castle, which is at the
entrance of the port, knew who we were, and took no notice of us; and we
were not above a mile out of the port before we hauled in our sail and
set us down to fish.  The wind blew from the N.N.E., which was contrary
to my desire, for had it blown southerly I had been sure to have made the
coast of Spain, and at least reached to the bay of Cadiz; but my
resolutions were, blow which way it would, I would be gone from that
horrid place where I was, and leave the rest to fate.

After we had fished some time and caught nothing—for when I had fish on
my hook I would not pull them up, that he might not see them—I said to
the Moor, “This will not do; our master will not be thus served; we must
stand farther off.”  He, thinking no harm, agreed, and being in the head
of the boat, set the sails; and, as I had the helm, I ran the boat out
near a league farther, and then brought her to, as if I would fish; when,
giving the boy the helm, I stepped forward to where the Moor was, and
making as if I stooped for something behind him, I took him by surprise
with my arm under his waist, and tossed him clear overboard into the sea.
He rose immediately, for he swam like a cork, and called to me, begged to
be taken in, told me he would go all over the world with me.  He swam so
strong after the boat that he would have reached me very quickly, there
being but little wind; upon which I stepped into the cabin, and fetching
one of the fowling-pieces, I presented it at him, and told him I had done
him no hurt, and if he would be quiet I would do him none.  “But,” said
I, “you swim well enough to reach to the shore, and the sea is calm; make
the best of your way to shore, and I will do you no harm; but if you come
near the boat I’ll shoot you through the head, for I am resolved to have
my liberty;” so he turned himself about, and swam for the shore, and I
make no doubt but he reached it with ease, for he was an excellent
swimmer.

I could have been content to have taken this Moor with me, and have
drowned the boy, but there was no venturing to trust him.  When he was
gone, I turned to the boy, whom they called Xury, and said to him, “Xury,
if you will be faithful to me, I’ll make you a great man; but if you will
not stroke your face to be true to me”—that is, swear by Mahomet and his
father’s beard—“I must throw you into the sea too.”  The boy smiled in my
face, and spoke so innocently that I could not distrust him, and swore to
be faithful to me, and go all over the world with me.

While I was in view of the Moor that was swimming, I stood out directly
to sea with the boat, rather stretching to windward, that they might
think me gone towards the Straits’ mouth (as indeed any one that had been
in their wits must have been supposed to do): for who would have supposed
we were sailed on to the southward, to the truly Barbarian coast, where
whole nations of negroes were sure to surround us with their canoes and
destroy us; where we could not go on shore but we should be devoured by
savage beasts, or more merciless savages of human kind.

But as soon as it grew dusk in the evening, I changed my course, and
steered directly south and by east, bending my course a little towards
the east, that I might keep in with the shore; and having a fair, fresh
gale of wind, and a smooth, quiet sea, I made such sail that I believe by
the next day, at three o’clock in the afternoon, when I first made the
land, I could not be less than one hundred and fifty miles south of
Sallee; quite beyond the Emperor of Morocco’s dominions, or indeed of any
other king thereabouts, for we saw no people.

Yet such was the fright I had taken of the Moors, and the dreadful
apprehensions I had of falling into their hands, that I would not stop,
or go on shore, or come to an anchor; the wind continuing fair till I had
sailed in that manner five days; and then the wind shifting to the
southward, I concluded also that if any of our vessels were in chase of
me, they also would now give over; so I ventured to make to the coast,
and came to an anchor in the mouth of a little river, I knew not what,
nor where, neither what latitude, what country, what nation, or what
river.  I neither saw, nor desired to see any people; the principal thing
I wanted was fresh water.  We came into this creek in the evening,
resolving to swim on shore as soon as it was dark, and discover the
country; but as soon as it was quite dark, we heard such dreadful noises
of the barking, roaring, and howling of wild creatures, of we knew not
what kinds, that the poor boy was ready to die with fear, and begged of
me not to go on shore till day.  “Well, Xury,” said I, “then I won’t; but
it may be that we may see men by day, who will be as bad to us as those
lions.”  “Then we give them the shoot gun,” says Xury, laughing, “make
them run wey.”  Such English Xury spoke by conversing among us slaves.
However, I was glad to see the boy so cheerful, and I gave him a dram
(out of our patron’s case of bottles) to cheer him up.  After all, Xury’s
advice was good, and I took it; we dropped our little anchor, and lay
still all night; I say still, for we slept none; for in two or three
hours we saw vast great creatures (we knew not what to call them) of many
sorts, come down to the sea-shore and run into the water, wallowing and
washing themselves for the pleasure of cooling themselves; and they made
such hideous howlings and yellings, that I never indeed heard the like.

Xury was dreadfully frighted, and indeed so was I too; but we were both
more frighted when we heard one of these mighty creatures come swimming
towards our boat; we could not see him, but we might hear him by his
blowing to be a monstrous huge and furious beast.  Xury said it was a
lion, and it might be so for aught I know; but poor Xury cried to me to
weigh the anchor and row away; “No,” says I, “Xury; we can slip our
cable, with the buoy to it, and go off to sea; they cannot follow us
far.”  I had no sooner said so, but I perceived the creature (whatever it
was) within two oars’ length, which something surprised me; however, I
immediately stepped to the cabin door, and taking up my gun, fired at
him; upon which he immediately turned about and swam towards the shore
again.

But it is impossible to describe the horrid noises, and hideous cries and
howlings that were raised, as well upon the edge of the shore as higher
within the country, upon the noise or report of the gun, a thing I have
some reason to believe those creatures had never heard before: this
convinced me that there was no going on shore for us in the night on that
coast, and how to venture on shore in the day was another question too;
for to have fallen into the hands of any of the savages had been as bad
as to have fallen into the hands of the lions and tigers; at least we
were equally apprehensive of the danger of it.

Be that as it would, we were obliged to go on shore somewhere or other
for water, for we had not a pint left in the boat; when and where to get
to it was the point.  Xury said, if I would let him go on shore with one
of the jars, he would find if there was any water, and bring some to me.
I asked him why he would go? why I should not go, and he stay in the
boat?  The boy answered with so much affection as made me love him ever
after.  Says he, “If wild mans come, they eat me, you go wey.”  “Well,
Xury,” said I, “we will both go and if the wild mans come, we will kill
them, they shall eat neither of us.”  So I gave Xury a piece of rusk
bread to eat, and a dram out of our patron’s case of bottles which I
mentioned before; and we hauled the boat in as near the shore as we
thought was proper, and so waded on shore, carrying nothing but our arms
and two jars for water.

I did not care to go out of sight of the boat, fearing the coming of
canoes with savages down the river; but the boy seeing a low place about
a mile up the country, rambled to it, and by-and-by I saw him come
running towards me.  I thought he was pursued by some savage, or frighted
with some wild beast, and I ran forward towards him to help him; but when
I came nearer to him I saw something hanging over his shoulders, which
was a creature that he had shot, like a hare, but different in colour,
and longer legs; however, we were very glad of it, and it was very good
meat; but the great joy that poor Xury came with, was to tell me he had
found good water and seen no wild mans.

But we found afterwards that we need not take such pains for water, for a
little higher up the creek where we were we found the water fresh when
the tide was out, which flowed but a little way up; so we filled our
jars, and feasted on the hare he had killed, and prepared to go on our
way, having seen no footsteps of any human creature in that part of the
country.

As I had been one voyage to this coast before, I knew very well that the
islands of the Canaries, and the Cape de Verde Islands also, lay not far
off from the coast.  But as I had no instruments to take an observation
to know what latitude we were in, and not exactly knowing, or at least
remembering, what latitude they were in, I knew not where to look for
them, or when to stand off to sea towards them; otherwise I might now
easily have found some of these islands.  But my hope was, that if I
stood along this coast till I came to that part where the English traded,
I should find some of their vessels upon their usual design of trade,
that would relieve and take us in.

By the best of my calculation, that place where I now was must be that
country which, lying between the Emperor of Morocco’s dominions and the
negroes, lies waste and uninhabited, except by wild beasts; the negroes
having abandoned it and gone farther south for fear of the Moors, and the
Moors not thinking it worth inhabiting by reason of its barrenness; and
indeed, both forsaking it because of the prodigious number of tigers,
lions, leopards, and other furious creatures which harbour there; so that
the Moors use it for their hunting only, where they go like an army, two
or three thousand men at a time; and indeed for near a hundred miles
together upon this coast we saw nothing but a waste, uninhabited country
by day, and heard nothing but howlings and roaring of wild beasts by
night.

Once or twice in the daytime I thought I saw the Pico of Teneriffe, being
the high top of the Mountain Teneriffe in the Canaries, and had a great
mind to venture out, in hopes of reaching thither; but having tried
twice, I was forced in again by contrary winds, the sea also going too
high for my little vessel; so, I resolved to pursue my first design, and
keep along the shore.

Several times I was obliged to land for fresh water, after we had left
this place; and once in particular, being early in morning, we came to an
anchor under a little point of land, which was pretty high; and the tide
beginning to flow, we lay still to go farther in.  Xury, whose eyes were
more about him than it seems mine were, calls softly to me, and tells me
that we had best go farther off the shore; “For,” says he, “look, yonder
lies a dreadful monster on the side of that hillock, fast asleep.”  I
looked where he pointed, and saw a dreadful monster indeed, for it was a
terrible, great lion that lay on the side of the shore, under the shade
of a piece of the hill that hung as it were a little over him.  “Xury,”
says I, “you shall on shore and kill him.”  Xury, looked frighted, and
said, “Me kill! he eat me at one mouth!”—one mouthful he meant.  However,
I said no more to the boy, but bade him lie still, and I took our biggest
gun, which was almost musket-bore, and loaded it with a good charge of
powder, and with two slugs, and laid it down; then I loaded another gun
with two bullets; and the third (for we had three pieces) I loaded with
five smaller bullets.  I took the best aim I could with the first piece
to have shot him in the head, but he lay so with his leg raised a little
above his nose, that the slugs hit his leg about the knee and broke the
bone.  He started up, growling at first, but finding his leg broken, fell
down again; and then got upon three legs, and gave the most hideous roar
that ever I heard.  I was a little surprised that I had not hit him on
the head; however, I took up the second piece immediately, and though he
began to move off, fired again, and shot him in the head, and had the
pleasure to see him drop and make but little noise, but lie struggling
for life.  Then Xury took heart, and would have me let him go on shore.
“Well, go,” said I: so the boy jumped into the water and taking a little
gun in one hand, swam to shore with the other hand, and coming close to
the creature, put the muzzle of the piece to his ear, and shot him in the
head again, which despatched him quite.

This was game indeed to us, but this was no food; and I was very sorry to
lose three charges of powder and shot upon a creature that was good for
nothing to us.  However, Xury said he would have some of him; so he comes
on board, and asked me to give him the hatchet.  “For what, Xury?” said
I.  “Me cut off his head,” said he.  However, Xury could not cut off his
head, but he cut off a foot, and brought it with him, and it was a
monstrous great one.

I bethought myself, however, that, perhaps the skin of him might, one way
or other, be of some value to us; and I resolved to take off his skin if
I could.  So Xury and I went to work with him; but Xury was much the
better workman at it, for I knew very ill how to do it.  Indeed, it took
us both up the whole day, but at last we got off the hide of him, and
spreading it on the top of our cabin, the sun effectually dried it in two
days’ time, and it afterwards served me to lie upon.




CHAPTER III—WRECKED ON A DESERT ISLAND


After this stop, we made on to the southward continually for ten or
twelve days, living very sparingly on our provisions, which began to
abate very much, and going no oftener to the shore than we were obliged
to for fresh water.  My design in this was to make the river Gambia or
Senegal, that is to say anywhere about the Cape de Verde, where I was in
hopes to meet with some European ship; and if I did not, I knew not what
course I had to take, but to seek for the islands, or perish there among
the negroes.  I knew that all the ships from Europe, which sailed either
to the coast of Guinea or to Brazil, or to the East Indies, made this
cape, or those islands; and, in a word, I put the whole of my fortune
upon this single point, either that I must meet with some ship or must
perish.

When I had pursued this resolution about ten days longer, as I have said,
I began to see that the land was inhabited; and in two or three places,
as we sailed by, we saw people stand upon the shore to look at us; we
could also perceive they were quite black and naked.  I was once inclined
to have gone on shore to them; but Xury was my better counsellor, and
said to me, “No go, no go.”  However, I hauled in nearer the shore that I
might talk to them, and I found they ran along the shore by me a good
way.  I observed they had no weapons in their hand, except one, who had a
long slender stick, which Xury said was a lance, and that they could
throw them a great way with good aim; so I kept at a distance, but talked
with them by signs as well as I could; and particularly made signs for
something to eat: they beckoned to me to stop my boat, and they would
fetch me some meat.  Upon this I lowered the top of my sail and lay by,
and two of them ran up into the country, and in less than half-an-hour
came back, and brought with them two pieces of dried flesh and some corn,
such as is the produce of their country; but we neither knew what the one
or the other was; however, we were willing to accept it, but how to come
at it was our next dispute, for I would not venture on shore to them, and
they were as much afraid of us; but they took a safe way for us all, for
they brought it to the shore and laid it down, and went and stood a great
way off till we fetched it on board, and then came close to us again.

We made signs of thanks to them, for we had nothing to make them amends;
but an opportunity offered that very instant to oblige them wonderfully;
for while we were lying by the shore came two mighty creatures, one
pursuing the other (as we took it) with great fury from the mountains
towards the sea; whether it was the male pursuing the female, or whether
they were in sport or in rage, we could not tell, any more than we could
tell whether it was usual or strange, but I believe it was the latter;
because, in the first place, those ravenous creatures seldom appear but
in the night; and, in the second place, we found the people terribly
frighted, especially the women.  The man that had the lance or dart did
not fly from them, but the rest did; however, as the two creatures ran
directly into the water, they did not offer to fall upon any of the
negroes, but plunged themselves into the sea, and swam about, as if they
had come for their diversion; at last one of them began to come nearer
our boat than at first I expected; but I lay ready for him, for I had
loaded my gun with all possible expedition, and bade Xury load both the
others.  As soon as he came fairly within my reach, I fired, and shot him
directly in the head; immediately he sank down into the water, but rose
instantly, and plunged up and down, as if he were struggling for life,
and so indeed he was; he immediately made to the shore; but between the
wound, which was his mortal hurt, and the strangling of the water, he
died just before he reached the shore.

It is impossible to express the astonishment of these poor creatures at
the noise and fire of my gun: some of them were even ready to die for
fear, and fell down as dead with the very terror; but when they saw the
creature dead, and sunk in the water, and that I made signs to them to
come to the shore, they took heart and came, and began to search for the
creature.  I found him by his blood staining the water; and by the help
of a rope, which I slung round him, and gave the negroes to haul, they
dragged him on shore, and found that it was a most curious leopard,
spotted, and fine to an admirable degree; and the negroes held up their
hands with admiration, to think what it was I had killed him with.

The other creature, frighted with the flash of fire and the noise of the
gun, swam on shore, and ran up directly to the mountains from whence they
came; nor could I, at that distance, know what it was.  I found quickly
the negroes wished to eat the flesh of this creature, so I was willing to
have them take it as a favour from me; which, when I made signs to them
that they might take him, they were very thankful for.  Immediately they
fell to work with him; and though they had no knife, yet, with a
sharpened piece of wood, they took off his skin as readily, and much more
readily, than we could have done with a knife.  They offered me some of
the flesh, which I declined, pointing out that I would give it them; but
made signs for the skin, which they gave me very freely, and brought me a
great deal more of their provisions, which, though I did not understand,
yet I accepted.  I then made signs to them for some water, and held out
one of my jars to them, turning it bottom upward, to show that it was
empty, and that I wanted to have it filled.  They called immediately to
some of their friends, and there came two women, and brought a great
vessel made of earth, and burnt, as I supposed, in the sun, this they set
down to me, as before, and I sent Xury on shore with my jars, and filled
them all three.  The women were as naked as the men.

I was now furnished with roots and corn, such as it was, and water; and
leaving my friendly negroes, I made forward for about eleven days more,
without offering to go near the shore, till I saw the land run out a
great length into the sea, at about the distance of four or five leagues
before me; and the sea being very calm, I kept a large offing to make
this point.  At length, doubling the point, at about two leagues from the
land, I saw plainly land on the other side, to seaward; then I concluded,
as it was most certain indeed, that this was the Cape de Verde, and those
the islands called, from thence, Cape de Verde Islands.  However, they
were at a great distance, and I could not well tell what I had best to
do; for if I should be taken with a fresh of wind, I might neither reach
one or other.

In this dilemma, as I was very pensive, I stepped into the cabin and sat
down, Xury having the helm; when, on a sudden, the boy cried out,
“Master, master, a ship with a sail!” and the foolish boy was frighted
out of his wits, thinking it must needs be some of his master’s ships
sent to pursue us, but I knew we were far enough out of their reach.  I
jumped out of the cabin, and immediately saw, not only the ship, but that
it was a Portuguese ship; and, as I thought, was bound to the coast of
Guinea, for negroes.  But, when I observed the course she steered, I was
soon convinced they were bound some other way, and did not design to come
any nearer to the shore; upon which I stretched out to sea as much as I
could, resolving to speak with them if possible.

With all the sail I could make, I found I should not be able to come in
their way, but that they would be gone by before I could make any signal
to them: but after I had crowded to the utmost, and began to despair,
they, it seems, saw by the help of their glasses that it was some
European boat, which they supposed must belong to some ship that was
lost; so they shortened sail to let me come up.  I was encouraged with
this, and as I had my patron’s ancient on board, I made a waft of it to
them, for a signal of distress, and fired a gun, both which they saw; for
they told me they saw the smoke, though they did not hear the gun.  Upon
these signals they very kindly brought to, and lay by for me; and in
about three hours; time I came up with them.

They asked me what I was, in Portuguese, and in Spanish, and in French,
but I understood none of them; but at last a Scotch sailor, who was on
board, called to me: and I answered him, and told him I was an
Englishman, that I had made my escape out of slavery from the Moors, at
Sallee; they then bade me come on board, and very kindly took me in, and
all my goods.

It was an inexpressible joy to me, which any one will believe, that I was
thus delivered, as I esteemed it, from such a miserable and almost
hopeless condition as I was in; and I immediately offered all I had to
the captain of the ship, as a return for my deliverance; but he
generously told me he would take nothing from me, but that all I had
should be delivered safe to me when I came to the Brazils.  “For,” says
he, “I have saved your life on no other terms than I would be glad to be
saved myself; and it may, one time or other, be my lot to be taken up in
the same condition.  Besides,” said he, “when I carry you to the Brazils,
so great a way from your own country, if I should take from you what you
have, you will be starved there, and then I only take away that life I
have given.  No, no,” says he: “Seignior Inglese” (Mr. Englishman), “I
will carry you thither in charity, and those things will help to buy your
subsistence there, and your passage home again.”

As he was charitable in this proposal, so he was just in the performance
to a tittle; for he ordered the seamen that none should touch anything
that I had: then he took everything into his own possession, and gave me
back an exact inventory of them, that I might have them, even to my three
earthen jars.

As to my boat, it was a very good one; and that he saw, and told me he
would buy it of me for his ship’s use; and asked me what I would have for
it?  I told him he had been so generous to me in everything that I could
not offer to make any price of the boat, but left it entirely to him:
upon which he told me he would give me a note of hand to pay me eighty
pieces of eight for it at Brazil; and when it came there, if any one
offered to give more, he would make it up.  He offered me also sixty
pieces of eight more for my boy Xury, which I was loth to take; not that
I was unwilling to let the captain have him, but I was very loth to sell
the poor boy’s liberty, who had assisted me so faithfully in procuring my
own.  However, when I let him know my reason, he owned it to be just, and
offered me this medium, that he would give the boy an obligation to set
him free in ten years, if he turned Christian: upon this, and Xury saying
he was willing to go to him, I let the captain have him.

We had a very good voyage to the Brazils, and I arrived in the Bay de
Todos los Santos, or All Saints’ Bay, in about twenty-two days after.
And now I was once more delivered from the most miserable of all
conditions of life; and what to do next with myself I was to consider.

The generous treatment the captain gave me I can never enough remember:
he would take nothing of me for my passage, gave me twenty ducats for the
leopard’s skin, and forty for the lion’s skin, which I had in my boat,
and caused everything I had in the ship to be punctually delivered to me;
and what I was willing to sell he bought of me, such as the case of
bottles, two of my guns, and a piece of the lump of beeswax—for I had
made candles of the rest: in a word, I made about two hundred and twenty
pieces of eight of all my cargo; and with this stock I went on shore in
the Brazils.

I had not been long here before I was recommended to the house of a good
honest man like himself, who had an _ingenio_, as they call it (that is,
a plantation and a sugar-house).  I lived with him some time, and
acquainted myself by that means with the manner of planting and making of
sugar; and seeing how well the planters lived, and how they got rich
suddenly, I resolved, if I could get a licence to settle there, I would
turn planter among them: resolving in the meantime to find out some way
to get my money, which I had left in London, remitted to me.  To this
purpose, getting a kind of letter of naturalisation, I purchased as much
land that was uncured as my money would reach, and formed a plan for my
plantation and settlement; such a one as might be suitable to the stock
which I proposed to myself to receive from England.

I had a neighbour, a Portuguese, of Lisbon, but born of English parents,
whose name was Wells, and in much such circumstances as I was.  I call
him my neighbour, because his plantation lay next to mine, and we went on
very sociably together.  My stock was but low, as well as his; and we
rather planted for food than anything else, for about two years.
However, we began to increase, and our land began to come into order; so
that the third year we planted some tobacco, and made each of us a large
piece of ground ready for planting canes in the year to come.  But we
both wanted help; and now I found, more than before, I had done wrong in
parting with my boy Xury.

But, alas! for me to do wrong that never did right, was no great wonder.
I hail no remedy but to go on: I had got into an employment quite remote
to my genius, and directly contrary to the life I delighted in, and for
which I forsook my father’s house, and broke through all his good advice.
Nay, I was coming into the very middle station, or upper degree of low
life, which my father advised me to before, and which, if I resolved to
go on with, I might as well have stayed at home, and never have fatigued
myself in the world as I had done; and I used often to say to myself, I
could have done this as well in England, among my friends, as have gone
five thousand miles off to do it among strangers and savages, in a
wilderness, and at such a distance as never to hear from any part of the
world that had the least knowledge of me.

In this manner I used to look upon my condition with the utmost regret.
I had nobody to converse with, but now and then this neighbour; no work
to be done, but by the labour of my hands; and I used to say, I lived
just like a man cast away upon some desolate island, that had nobody
there but himself.  But how just has it been—and how should all men
reflect, that when they compare their present conditions with others that
are worse, Heaven may oblige them to make the exchange, and be convinced
of their former felicity by their experience—I say, how just has it been,
that the truly solitary life I reflected on, in an island of mere
desolation, should be my lot, who had so often unjustly compared it with
the life which I then led, in which, had I continued, I had in all
probability been exceeding prosperous and rich.

I was in some degree settled in my measures for carrying on the
plantation before my kind friend, the captain of the ship that took me up
at sea, went back—for the ship remained there, in providing his lading
and preparing for his voyage, nearly three months—when telling him what
little stock I had left behind me in London, he gave me this friendly and
sincere advice:—“Seignior Inglese,” says he (for so he always called me),
“if you will give me letters, and a procuration in form to me, with
orders to the person who has your money in London to send your effects to
Lisbon, to such persons as I shall direct, and in such goods as are
proper for this country, I will bring you the produce of them, God
willing, at my return; but, since human affairs are all subject to
changes and disasters, I would have you give orders but for one hundred
pounds sterling, which, you say, is half your stock, and let the hazard
be run for the first; so that, if it come safe, you may order the rest
the same way, and, if it miscarry, you may have the other half to have
recourse to for your supply.”

This was so wholesome advice, and looked so friendly, that I could not
but be convinced it was the best course I could take; so I accordingly
prepared letters to the gentlewoman with whom I had left my money, and a
procuration to the Portuguese captain, as he desired.

I wrote the English captain’s widow a full account of all my
adventures—my slavery, escape, and how I had met with the Portuguese
captain at sea, the humanity of his behaviour, and what condition I was
now in, with all other necessary directions for my supply; and when this
honest captain came to Lisbon, he found means, by some of the English
merchants there, to send over, not the order only, but a full account of
my story to a merchant in London, who represented it effectually to her;
whereupon she not only delivered the money, but out of her own pocket
sent the Portugal captain a very handsome present for his humanity and
charity to me.

The merchant in London, vesting this hundred pounds in English goods,
such as the captain had written for, sent them directly to him at Lisbon,
and he brought them all safe to me to the Brazils; among which, without
my direction (for I was too young in my business to think of them), he
had taken care to have all sorts of tools, ironwork, and utensils
necessary for my plantation, and which were of great use to me.

When this cargo arrived I thought my fortune made, for I was surprised
with the joy of it; and my stood steward, the captain, had laid out the
five pounds, which my friend had sent him for a present for himself, to
purchase and bring me over a servant, under bond for six years’ service,
and would not accept of any consideration, except a little tobacco, which
I would have him accept, being of my own produce.

Neither was this all; for my goods being all English manufacture, such as
cloths, stuffs, baize, and things particularly valuable and desirable in
the country, I found means to sell them to a very great advantage; so
that I might say I had more than four times the value of my first cargo,
and was now infinitely beyond my poor neighbour—I mean in the advancement
of my plantation; for the first thing I did, I bought me a negro slave,
and an European servant also—I mean another besides that which the
captain brought me from Lisbon.

But as abused prosperity is oftentimes made the very means of our
greatest adversity, so it was with me.  I went on the next year with
great success in my plantation: I raised fifty great rolls of tobacco on
my own ground, more than I had disposed of for necessaries among my
neighbours; and these fifty rolls, being each of above a hundredweight,
were well cured, and laid by against the return of the fleet from Lisbon:
and now increasing in business and wealth, my head began to be full of
projects and undertakings beyond my reach; such as are, indeed, often the
ruin of the best heads in business.  Had I continued in the station I was
now in, I had room for all the happy things to have yet befallen me for
which my father so earnestly recommended a quiet, retired life, and of
which he had so sensibly described the middle station of life to be full
of; but other things attended me, and I was still to be the wilful agent
of all my own miseries; and particularly, to increase my fault, and
double the reflections upon myself, which in my future sorrows I should
have leisure to make, all these miscarriages were procured by my apparent
obstinate adhering to my foolish inclination of wandering abroad, and
pursuing that inclination, in contradiction to the clearest views of
doing myself good in a fair and plain pursuit of those prospects, and
those measures of life, which nature and Providence concurred to present
me with, and to make my duty.

As I had once done thus in my breaking away from my parents, so I could
not be content now, but I must go and leave the happy view I had of being
a rich and thriving man in my new plantation, only to pursue a rash and
immoderate desire of rising faster than the nature of the thing admitted;
and thus I cast myself down again into the deepest gulf of human misery
that ever man fell into, or perhaps could be consistent with life and a
state of health in the world.

To come, then, by the just degrees to the particulars of this part of my
story.  You may suppose, that having now lived almost four years in the
Brazils, and beginning to thrive and prosper very well upon my
plantation, I had not only learned the language, but had contracted
acquaintance and friendship among my fellow-planters, as well as among
the merchants at St. Salvador, which was our port; and that, in my
discourses among them, I had frequently given them an account of my two
voyages to the coast of Guinea: the manner of trading with the negroes
there, and how easy it was to purchase upon the coast for trifles—such as
beads, toys, knives, scissors, hatchets, bits of glass, and the like—not
only gold-dust, Guinea grains, elephants’ teeth, &c., but negroes, for
the service of the Brazils, in great numbers.

They listened always very attentively to my discourses on these heads,
but especially to that part which related to the buying of negroes, which
was a trade at that time, not only not far entered into, but, as far as
it was, had been carried on by assientos, or permission of the kings of
Spain and Portugal, and engrossed in the public stock: so that few
negroes were bought, and these excessively dear.

It happened, being in company with some merchants and planters of my
acquaintance, and talking of those things very earnestly, three of them
came to me next morning, and told me they had been musing very much upon
what I had discoursed with them of the last night, and they came to make
a secret proposal to me; and, after enjoining me to secrecy, they told me
that they had a mind to fit out a ship to go to Guinea; that they had all
plantations as well as I, and were straitened for nothing so much as
servants; that as it was a trade that could not be carried on, because
they could not publicly sell the negroes when they came home, so they
desired to make but one voyage, to bring the negroes on shore privately,
and divide them among their own plantations; and, in a word, the question
was whether I would go their supercargo in the ship, to manage the
trading part upon the coast of Guinea; and they offered me that I should
have my equal share of the negroes, without providing any part of the
stock.

This was a fair proposal, it must be confessed, had it been made to any
one that had not had a settlement and a plantation of his own to look
after, which was in a fair way of coming to be very considerable, and
with a good stock upon it; but for me, that was thus entered and
established, and had nothing to do but to go on as I had begun, for three
or four years more, and to have sent for the other hundred pounds from
England; and who in that time, and with that little addition, could
scarce have failed of being worth three or four thousand pounds sterling,
and that increasing too—for me to think of such a voyage was the most
preposterous thing that ever man in such circumstances could be guilty
of.

But I, that was born to be my own destroyer, could no more resist the
offer than I could restrain my first rambling designs when my father’s
good counsel was lost upon me.  In a word, I told them I would go with
all my heart, if they would undertake to look after my plantation in my
absence, and would dispose of it to such as I should direct, if I
miscarried.  This they all engaged to do, and entered into writings or
covenants to do so; and I made a formal will, disposing of my plantation
and effects in case of my death, making the captain of the ship that had
saved my life, as before, my universal heir, but obliging him to dispose
of my effects as I had directed in my will; one half of the produce being
to himself, and the other to be shipped to England.

In short, I took all possible caution to preserve my effects and to keep
up my plantation.  Had I used half as much prudence to have looked into
my own interest, and have made a judgment of what I ought to have done
and not to have done, I had certainly never gone away from so prosperous
an undertaking, leaving all the probable views of a thriving
circumstance, and gone upon a voyage to sea, attended with all its common
hazards, to say nothing of the reasons I had to expect particular
misfortunes to myself.

But I was hurried on, and obeyed blindly the dictates of my fancy rather
than my reason; and, accordingly, the ship being fitted out, and the
cargo furnished, and all things done, as by agreement, by my partners in
the voyage, I went on board in an evil hour, the 1st September 1659,
being the same day eight years that I went from my father and mother at
Hull, in order to act the rebel to their authority, and the fool to my
own interests.

Our ship was about one hundred and twenty tons burden, carried six guns
and fourteen men, besides the master, his boy, and myself.  We had on
board no large cargo of goods, except of such toys as were fit for our
trade with the negroes, such as beads, bits of glass, shells, and other
trifles, especially little looking-glasses, knives, scissors, hatchets,
and the like.

The same day I went on board we set sail, standing away to the northward
upon our own coast, with design to stretch over for the African coast
when we came about ten or twelve degrees of northern latitude, which, it
seems, was the manner of course in those days.  We had very good weather,
only excessively hot, all the way upon our own coast, till we came to the
height of Cape St. Augustino; from whence, keeping further off at sea, we
lost sight of land, and steered as if we were bound for the isle Fernando
de Noronha, holding our course N.E. by N., and leaving those isles on the
east.  In this course we passed the line in about twelve days’ time, and
were, by our last observation, in seven degrees twenty-two minutes
northern latitude, when a violent tornado, or hurricane, took us quite
out of our knowledge.  It began from the south-east, came about to the
north-west, and then settled in the north-east; from whence it blew in
such a terrible manner, that for twelve days together we could do nothing
but drive, and, scudding away before it, let it carry us whither fate and
the fury of the winds directed; and, during these twelve days, I need not
say that I expected every day to be swallowed up; nor, indeed, did any in
the ship expect to save their lives.

In this distress we had, besides the terror of the storm, one of our men
die of the calenture, and one man and the boy washed overboard.  About
the twelfth day, the weather abating a little, the master made an
observation as well as he could, and found that he was in about eleven
degrees north latitude, but that he was twenty-two degrees of longitude
difference west from Cape St. Augustino; so that he found he was upon the
coast of Guiana, or the north part of Brazil, beyond the river Amazon,
toward that of the river Orinoco, commonly called the Great River; and
began to consult with me what course he should take, for the ship was
leaky, and very much disabled, and he was going directly back to the
coast of Brazil.

I was positively against that; and looking over the charts of the
sea-coast of America with him, we concluded there was no inhabited
country for us to have recourse to till we came within the circle of the
Caribbee Islands, and therefore resolved to stand away for Barbadoes;
which, by keeping off at sea, to avoid the indraft of the Bay or Gulf of
Mexico, we might easily perform, as we hoped, in about fifteen days’
sail; whereas we could not possibly make our voyage to the coast of
Africa without some assistance both to our ship and to ourselves.

With this design we changed our course, and steered away N.W. by W., in
order to reach some of our English islands, where I hoped for relief.
But our voyage was otherwise determined; for, being in the latitude of
twelve degrees eighteen minutes, a second storm came upon us, which
carried us away with the same impetuosity westward, and drove us so out
of the way of all human commerce, that, had all our lives been saved as
to the sea, we were rather in danger of being devoured by savages than
ever returning to our own country.

In this distress, the wind still blowing very hard, one of our men early
in the morning cried out, “Land!” and we had no sooner run out of the
cabin to look out, in hopes of seeing whereabouts in the world we were,
than the ship struck upon a sand, and in a moment her motion being so
stopped, the sea broke over her in such a manner that we expected we
should all have perished immediately; and we were immediately driven into
our close quarters, to shelter us from the very foam and spray of the
sea.

It is not easy for any one who has not been in the like condition to
describe or conceive the consternation of men in such circumstances.  We
knew nothing where we were, or upon what land it was we were
driven—whether an island or the main, whether inhabited or not inhabited.
As the rage of the wind was still great, though rather less than at
first, we could not so much as hope to have the ship hold many minutes
without breaking into pieces, unless the winds, by a kind of miracle,
should turn immediately about.  In a word, we sat looking upon one
another, and expecting death every moment, and every man, accordingly,
preparing for another world; for there was little or nothing more for us
to do in this.  That which was our present comfort, and all the comfort
we had, was that, contrary to our expectation, the ship did not break
yet, and that the master said the wind began to abate.

Now, though we thought that the wind did a little abate, yet the ship
having thus struck upon the sand, and sticking too fast for us to expect
her getting off, we were in a dreadful condition indeed, and had nothing
to do but to think of saving our lives as well as we could.  We had a
boat at our stern just before the storm, but she was first staved by
dashing against the ship’s rudder, and in the next place she broke away,
and either sunk or was driven off to sea; so there was no hope from her.
We had another boat on board, but how to get her off into the sea was a
doubtful thing.  However, there was no time to debate, for we fancied
that the ship would break in pieces every minute, and some told us she
was actually broken already.

In this distress the mate of our vessel laid hold of the boat, and with
the help of the rest of the men got her slung over the ship’s side; and
getting all into her, let go, and committed ourselves, being eleven in
number, to God’s mercy and the wild sea; for though the storm was abated
considerably, yet the sea ran dreadfully high upon the shore, and might
be well called _den wild zee_, as the Dutch call the sea in a storm.

And now our case was very dismal indeed; for we all saw plainly that the
sea went so high that the boat could not live, and that we should be
inevitably drowned.  As to making sail, we had none, nor if we had could
we have done anything with it; so we worked at the oar towards the land,
though with heavy hearts, like men going to execution; for we all knew
that when the boat came near the shore she would be dashed in a thousand
pieces by the breach of the sea.  However, we committed our souls to God
in the most earnest manner; and the wind driving us towards the shore, we
hastened our destruction with our own hands, pulling as well as we could
towards land.

What the shore was, whether rock or sand, whether steep or shoal, we knew
not.  The only hope that could rationally give us the least shadow of
expectation was, if we might find some bay or gulf, or the mouth of some
river, where by great chance we might have run our boat in, or got under
the lee of the land, and perhaps made smooth water.  But there was
nothing like this appeared; but as we made nearer and nearer the shore,
the land looked more frightful than the sea.

After we had rowed, or rather driven about a league and a half, as we
reckoned it, a raging wave, mountain-like, came rolling astern of us, and
plainly bade us expect the _coup de grâce_.  It took us with such a fury,
that it overset the boat at once; and separating us as well from the boat
as from one another, gave us no time to say, “O God!” for we were all
swallowed up in a moment.

Nothing can describe the confusion of thought which I felt when I sank
into the water; for though I swam very well, yet I could not deliver
myself from the waves so as to draw breath, till that wave having driven
me, or rather carried me, a vast way on towards the shore, and having
spent itself, went back, and left me upon the land almost dry, but half
dead with the water I took in.  I had so much presence of mind, as well
as breath left, that seeing myself nearer the mainland than I expected, I
got upon my feet, and endeavoured to make on towards the land as fast as
I could before another wave should return and take me up again; but I
soon found it was impossible to avoid it; for I saw the sea come after me
as high as a great hill, and as furious as an enemy, which I had no means
or strength to contend with: my business was to hold my breath, and raise
myself upon the water if I could; and so, by swimming, to preserve my
breathing, and pilot myself towards the shore, if possible, my greatest
concern now being that the sea, as it would carry me a great way towards
the shore when it came on, might not carry me back again with it when it
gave back towards the sea.

The wave that came upon me again buried me at once twenty or thirty feet
deep in its own body, and I could feel myself carried with a mighty force
and swiftness towards the shore—a very great way; but I held my breath,
and assisted myself to swim still forward with all my might.  I was ready
to burst with holding my breath, when, as I felt myself rising up, so, to
my immediate relief, I found my head and hands shoot out above the
surface of the water; and though it was not two seconds of time that I
could keep myself so, yet it relieved me greatly, gave me breath, and new
courage.  I was covered again with water a good while, but not so long
but I held it out; and finding the water had spent itself, and began to
return, I struck forward against the return of the waves, and felt ground
again with my feet.  I stood still a few moments to recover breath, and
till the waters went from me, and then took to my heels and ran with what
strength I had further towards the shore.  But neither would this deliver
me from the fury of the sea, which came pouring in after me again; and
twice more I was lifted up by the waves and carried forward as before,
the shore being very flat.

The last time of these two had well-nigh been fatal to me, for the sea
having hurried me along as before, landed me, or rather dashed me,
against a piece of rock, and that with such force, that it left me
senseless, and indeed helpless, as to my own deliverance; for the blow
taking my side and breast, beat the breath as it were quite out of my
body; and had it returned again immediately, I must have been strangled
in the water; but I recovered a little before the return of the waves,
and seeing I should be covered again with the water, I resolved to hold
fast by a piece of the rock, and so to hold my breath, if possible, till
the wave went back.  Now, as the waves were not so high as at first,
being nearer land, I held my hold till the wave abated, and then fetched
another run, which brought me so near the shore that the next wave,
though it went over me, yet did not so swallow me up as to carry me away;
and the next run I took, I got to the mainland, where, to my great
comfort, I clambered up the cliffs of the shore and sat me down upon the
grass, free from danger and quite out of the reach of the water.

I was now landed and safe on shore, and began to look up and thank God
that my life was saved, in a case wherein there was some minutes before
scarce any room to hope.  I believe it is impossible to express, to the
life, what the ecstasies and transports of the soul are, when it is so
saved, as I may say, out of the very grave: and I do not wonder now at
the custom, when a malefactor, who has the halter about his neck, is tied
up, and just going to be turned off, and has a reprieve brought to him—I
say, I do not wonder that they bring a surgeon with it, to let him blood
that very moment they tell him of it, that the surprise may not drive the
animal spirits from the heart and overwhelm him.

    “For sudden joys, like griefs, confound at first.”

I walked about on the shore lifting up my hands, and my whole being, as I
may say, wrapped up in a contemplation of my deliverance; making a
thousand gestures and motions, which I cannot describe; reflecting upon
all my comrades that were drowned, and that there should not be one soul
saved but myself; for, as for them, I never saw them afterwards, or any
sign of them, except three of their hats, one cap, and two shoes that
were not fellows.

I cast my eye to the stranded vessel, when, the breach and froth of the
sea being so big, I could hardly see it, it lay so far of; and
considered, Lord! how was it possible I could get on shore?

After I had solaced my mind with the comfortable part of my condition, I
began to look round me, to see what kind of place I was in, and what was
next to be done; and I soon found my comforts abate, and that, in a word,
I had a dreadful deliverance; for I was wet, had no clothes to shift me,
nor anything either to eat or drink to comfort me; neither did I see any
prospect before me but that of perishing with hunger or being devoured by
wild beasts; and that which was particularly afflicting to me was, that I
had no weapon, either to hunt and kill any creature for my sustenance, or
to defend myself against any other creature that might desire to kill me
for theirs.  In a word, I had nothing about me but a knife, a
tobacco-pipe, and a little tobacco in a box.  This was all my provisions;
and this threw me into such terrible agonies of mind, that for a while I
ran about like a madman.  Night coming upon me, I began with a heavy
heart to consider what would be my lot if there were any ravenous beasts
in that country, as at night they always come abroad for their prey.

All the remedy that offered to my thoughts at that time was to get up
into a thick bushy tree like a fir, but thorny, which grew near me, and
where I resolved to sit all night, and consider the next day what death I
should die, for as yet I saw no prospect of life.  I walked about a
furlong from the shore, to see if I could find any fresh water to drink,
which I did, to my great joy; and having drank, and put a little tobacco
into my mouth to prevent hunger, I went to the tree, and getting up into
it, endeavoured to place myself so that if I should sleep I might not
fall.  And having cut me a short stick, like a truncheon, for my defence,
I took up my lodging; and having been excessively fatigued, I fell fast
asleep, and slept as comfortably as, I believe, few could have done in my
condition, and found myself more refreshed with it than, I think, I ever
was on such an occasion.




CHAPTER IV—FIRST WEEKS ON THE ISLAND


When I waked it was broad day, the weather clear, and the storm abated,
so that the sea did not rage and swell as before.  But that which
surprised me most was, that the ship was lifted off in the night from the
sand where she lay by the swelling of the tide, and was driven up almost
as far as the rock which I at first mentioned, where I had been so
bruised by the wave dashing me against it.  This being within about a
mile from the shore where I was, and the ship seeming to stand upright
still, I wished myself on board, that at least I might save some
necessary things for my use.

When I came down from my apartment in the tree, I looked about me again,
and the first thing I found was the boat, which lay, as the wind and the
sea had tossed her up, upon the land, about two miles on my right hand.
I walked as far as I could upon the shore to have got to her; but found a
neck or inlet of water between me and the boat which was about half a
mile broad; so I came back for the present, being more intent upon
getting at the ship, where I hoped to find something for my present
subsistence.

A little after noon I found the sea very calm, and the tide ebbed so far
out that I could come within a quarter of a mile of the ship.  And here I
found a fresh renewing of my grief; for I saw evidently that if we had
kept on board we had been all safe—that is to say, we had all got safe on
shore, and I had not been so miserable as to be left entirely destitute
of all comfort and company as I now was.  This forced tears to my eyes
again; but as there was little relief in that, I resolved, if possible,
to get to the ship; so I pulled off my clothes—for the weather was hot to
extremity—and took the water.  But when I came to the ship my difficulty
was still greater to know how to get on board; for, as she lay aground,
and high out of the water, there was nothing within my reach to lay hold
of.  I swam round her twice, and the second time I spied a small piece of
rope, which I wondered I did not see at first, hung down by the
fore-chains so low, as that with great difficulty I got hold of it, and
by the help of that rope I got up into the forecastle of the ship.  Here
I found that the ship was bulged, and had a great deal of water in her
hold, but that she lay so on the side of a bank of hard sand, or, rather
earth, that her stern lay lifted up upon the bank, and her head low,
almost to the water.  By this means all her quarter was free, and all
that was in that part was dry; for you may be sure my first work was to
search, and to see what was spoiled and what was free.  And, first, I
found that all the ship’s provisions were dry and untouched by the water,
and being very well disposed to eat, I went to the bread room and filled
my pockets with biscuit, and ate it as I went about other things, for I
had no time to lose.  I also found some rum in the great cabin, of which
I took a large dram, and which I had, indeed, need enough of to spirit me
for what was before me.  Now I wanted nothing but a boat to furnish
myself with many things which I foresaw would be very necessary to me.

It was in vain to sit still and wish for what was not to be had; and this
extremity roused my application.  We had several spare yards, and two or
three large spars of wood, and a spare topmast or two in the ship; I
resolved to fall to work with these, and I flung as many of them
overboard as I could manage for their weight, tying every one with a
rope, that they might not drive away.  When this was done I went down the
ship’s side, and pulling them to me, I tied four of them together at both
ends as well as I could, in the form of a raft, and laying two or three
short pieces of plank upon them crossways, I found I could walk upon it
very well, but that it was not able to bear any great weight, the pieces
being too light.  So I went to work, and with a carpenter’s saw I cut a
spare topmast into three lengths, and added them to my raft, with a great
deal of labour and pains.  But the hope of furnishing myself with
necessaries encouraged me to go beyond what I should have been able to
have done upon another occasion.

My raft was now strong enough to bear any reasonable weight.  My next
care was what to load it with, and how to preserve what I laid upon it
from the surf of the sea; but I was not long considering this.  I first
laid all the planks or boards upon it that I could get, and having
considered well what I most wanted, I got three of the seamen’s chests,
which I had broken open, and emptied, and lowered them down upon my raft;
the first of these I filled with provisions—viz. bread, rice, three Dutch
cheeses, five pieces of dried goat’s flesh (which we lived much upon),
and a little remainder of European corn, which had been laid by for some
fowls which we brought to sea with us, but the fowls were killed.  There
had been some barley and wheat together; but, to my great disappointment,
I found afterwards that the rats had eaten or spoiled it all.  As for
liquors, I found several, cases of bottles belonging to our skipper, in
which were some cordial waters; and, in all, about five or six gallons of
rack.  These I stowed by themselves, there being no need to put them into
the chest, nor any room for them.  While I was doing this, I found the
tide begin to flow, though very calm; and I had the mortification to see
my coat, shirt, and waistcoat, which I had left on the shore, upon the
sand, swim away.  As for my breeches, which were only linen, and
open-kneed, I swam on board in them and my stockings.  However, this set
me on rummaging for clothes, of which I found enough, but took no more
than I wanted for present use, for I had others things which my eye was
more upon—as, first, tools to work with on shore.  And it was after long
searching that I found out the carpenter’s chest, which was, indeed, a
very useful prize to me, and much more valuable than a shipload of gold
would have been at that time.  I got it down to my raft, whole as it was,
without losing time to look into it, for I knew in general what it
contained.

My next care was for some ammunition and arms.  There were two very good
fowling-pieces in the great cabin, and two pistols.  These I secured
first, with some powder-horns and a small bag of shot, and two old rusty
swords.  I knew there were three barrels of powder in the ship, but knew
not where our gunner had stowed them; but with much search I found them,
two of them dry and good, the third had taken water.  Those two I got to
my raft with the arms.  And now I thought myself pretty well freighted,
and began to think how I should get to shore with them, having neither
sail, oar, nor rudder; and the least capful of wind would have overset
all my navigation.

I had three encouragements—1st, a smooth, calm sea; 2ndly, the tide
rising, and setting in to the shore; 3rdly, what little wind there was
blew me towards the land.  And thus, having found two or three broken
oars belonging to the boat—and, besides the tools which were in the
chest, I found two saws, an axe, and a hammer; with this cargo I put to
sea.  For a mile or thereabouts my raft went very well, only that I found
it drive a little distant from the place where I had landed before; by
which I perceived that there was some indraft of the water, and
consequently I hoped to find some creek or river there, which I might
make use of as a port to get to land with my cargo.

As I imagined, so it was.  There appeared before me a little opening of
the land, and I found a strong current of the tide set into it; so I
guided my raft as well as I could, to keep in the middle of the stream.

But here I had like to have suffered a second shipwreck, which, if I had,
I think verily would have broken my heart; for, knowing nothing of the
coast, my raft ran aground at one end of it upon a shoal, and not being
aground at the other end, it wanted but a little that all my cargo had
slipped off towards the end that was afloat, and to fallen into the
water.  I did my utmost, by setting my back against the chests, to keep
them in their places, but could not thrust off the raft with all my
strength; neither durst I stir from the posture I was in; but holding up
the chests with all my might, I stood in that manner near half-an-hour,
in which time the rising of the water brought me a little more upon a
level; and a little after, the water still-rising, my raft floated again,
and I thrust her off with the oar I had into the channel, and then
driving up higher, I at length found myself in the mouth of a little
river, with land on both sides, and a strong current of tide running up.
I looked on both sides for a proper place to get to shore, for I was not
willing to be driven too high up the river: hoping in time to see some
ships at sea, and therefore resolved to place myself as near the coast as
I could.

At length I spied a little cove on the right shore of the creek, to which
with great pain and difficulty I guided my raft, and at last got so near
that, reaching ground with my oar, I could thrust her directly in.  But
here I had like to have dipped all my cargo into the sea again; for that
shore lying pretty steep—that is to say sloping—there was no place to
land, but where one end of my float, if it ran on shore, would lie so
high, and the other sink lower, as before, that it would endanger my
cargo again.  All that I could do was to wait till the tide was at the
highest, keeping the raft with my oar like an anchor, to hold the side of
it fast to the shore, near a flat piece of ground, which I expected the
water would flow over; and so it did.  As soon as I found water
enough—for my raft drew about a foot of water—I thrust her upon that flat
piece of ground, and there fastened or moored her, by sticking my two
broken oars into the ground, one on one side near one end, and one on the
other side near the other end; and thus I lay till the water ebbed away,
and left my raft and all my cargo safe on shore.

My next work was to view the country, and seek a proper place for my
habitation, and where to stow my goods to secure them from whatever might
happen.  Where I was, I yet knew not; whether on the continent or on an
island; whether inhabited or not inhabited; whether in danger of wild
beasts or not.  There was a hill not above a mile from me, which rose up
very steep and high, and which seemed to overtop some other hills, which
lay as in a ridge from it northward.  I took out one of the
fowling-pieces, and one of the pistols, and a horn of powder; and thus
armed, I travelled for discovery up to the top of that hill, where, after
I had with great labour and difficulty got to the top, I saw my fate, to
my great affliction—viz. that I was in an island environed every way with
the sea: no land to be seen except some rocks, which lay a great way off;
and two small islands, less than this, which lay about three leagues to
the west.

I found also that the island I was in was barren, and, as I saw good
reason to believe, uninhabited except by wild beasts, of whom, however, I
saw none.  Yet I saw abundance of fowls, but knew not their kinds;
neither when I killed them could I tell what was fit for food, and what
not.  At my coming back, I shot at a great bird which I saw sitting upon
a tree on the side of a great wood.  I believe it was the first gun that
had been fired there since the creation of the world.  I had no sooner
fired, than from all parts of the wood there arose an innumerable number
of fowls, of many sorts, making a confused screaming and crying, and
every one according to his usual note, but not one of them of any kind
that I knew.  As for the creature I killed, I took it to be a kind of
hawk, its colour and beak resembling it, but it had no talons or claws
more than common.  Its flesh was carrion, and fit for nothing.

Contented with this discovery, I came back to my raft, and fell to work
to bring my cargo on shore, which took me up the rest of that day.  What
to do with myself at night I knew not, nor indeed where to rest, for I
was afraid to lie down on the ground, not knowing but some wild beast
might devour me, though, as I afterwards found, there was really no need
for those fears.

However, as well as I could, I barricaded myself round with the chest and
boards that I had brought on shore, and made a kind of hut for that
night’s lodging.  As for food, I yet saw not which way to supply myself,
except that I had seen two or three creatures like hares run out of the
wood where I shot the fowl.

I now began to consider that I might yet get a great many things out of
the ship which would be useful to me, and particularly some of the
rigging and sails, and such other things as might come to land; and I
resolved to make another voyage on board the vessel, if possible.  And as
I knew that the first storm that blew must necessarily break her all in
pieces, I resolved to set all other things apart till I had got
everything out of the ship that I could get.  Then I called a
council—that is to say in my thoughts—whether I should take back the
raft; but this appeared impracticable: so I resolved to go as before,
when the tide was down; and I did so, only that I stripped before I went
from my hut, having nothing on but my chequered shirt, a pair of linen
drawers, and a pair of pumps on my feet.

I got on board the ship as before, and prepared a second raft; and,
having had experience of the first, I neither made this so unwieldy, nor
loaded it so hard, but yet I brought away several things very useful to
me; as first, in the carpenters stores I found two or three bags full of
nails and spikes, a great screw-jack, a dozen or two of hatchets, and,
above all, that most useful thing called a grindstone.  All these I
secured, together with several things belonging to the gunner,
particularly two or three iron crows, and two barrels of musket bullets,
seven muskets, another fowling-piece, with some small quantity of powder
more; a large bagful of small shot, and a great roll of sheet-lead; but
this last was so heavy, I could not hoist it up to get it over the ship’s
side.

Besides these things, I took all the men’s clothes that I could find, and
a spare fore-topsail, a hammock, and some bedding; and with this I loaded
my second raft, and brought them all safe on shore, to my very great
comfort.

I was under some apprehension, during my absence from the land, that at
least my provisions might be devoured on shore: but when I came back I
found no sign of any visitor; only there sat a creature like a wild cat
upon one of the chests, which, when I came towards it, ran away a little
distance, and then stood still.  She sat very composed and unconcerned,
and looked full in my face, as if she had a mind to be acquainted with
me.  I presented my gun at her, but, as she did not understand it, she
was perfectly unconcerned at it, nor did she offer to stir away; upon
which I tossed her a bit of biscuit, though by the way, I was not very
free of it, for my store was not great: however, I spared her a bit, I
say, and she went to it, smelled at it, and ate it, and looked (as if
pleased) for more; but I thanked her, and could spare no more: so she
marched off.

Having got my second cargo on shore—though I was fain to open the barrels
of powder, and bring them by parcels, for they were too heavy, being
large casks—I went to work to make me a little tent with the sail and
some poles which I cut for that purpose: and into this tent I brought
everything that I knew would spoil either with rain or sun; and I piled
all the empty chests and casks up in a circle round the tent, to fortify
it from any sudden attempt, either from man or beast.

When I had done this, I blocked up the door of the tent with some boards
within, and an empty chest set up on end without; and spreading one of
the beds upon the ground, laying my two pistols just at my head, and my
gun at length by me, I went to bed for the first time, and slept very
quietly all night, for I was very weary and heavy; for the night before I
had slept little, and had laboured very hard all day to fetch all those
things from the ship, and to get them on shore.

I had the biggest magazine of all kinds now that ever was laid up, I
believe, for one man: but I was not satisfied still, for while the ship
sat upright in that posture, I thought I ought to get everything out of
her that I could; so every day at low water I went on board, and brought
away something or other; but particularly the third time I went I brought
away as much of the rigging as I could, as also all the small ropes and
rope-twine I could get, with a piece of spare canvas, which was to mend
the sails upon occasion, and the barrel of wet gunpowder.  In a word, I
brought away all the sails, first and last; only that I was fain to cut
them in pieces, and bring as much at a time as I could, for they were no
more useful to be sails, but as mere canvas only.

But that which comforted me more still, was, that last of all, after I
had made five or six such voyages as these, and thought I had nothing
more to expect from the ship that was worth my meddling with—I say, after
all this, I found a great hogshead of bread, three large runlets of rum,
or spirits, a box of sugar, and a barrel of fine flour; this was
surprising to me, because I had given over expecting any more provisions,
except what was spoiled by the water.  I soon emptied the hogshead of the
bread, and wrapped it up, parcel by parcel, in pieces of the sails, which
I cut out; and, in a word, I got all this safe on shore also.

The next day I made another voyage, and now, having plundered the ship of
what was portable and fit to hand out, I began with the cables.  Cutting
the great cable into pieces, such as I could move, I got two cables and a
hawser on shore, with all the ironwork I could get; and having cut down
the spritsail-yard, and the mizzen-yard, and everything I could, to make
a large raft, I loaded it with all these heavy goods, and came away.  But
my good luck began now to leave me; for this raft was so unwieldy, and so
overladen, that, after I had entered the little cove where I had landed
the rest of my goods, not being able to guide it so handily as I did the
other, it overset, and threw me and all my cargo into the water.  As for
myself, it was no great harm, for I was near the shore; but as to my
cargo, it was a great part of it lost, especially the iron, which I
expected would have been of great use to me; however, when the tide was
out, I got most of the pieces of the cable ashore, and some of the iron,
though with infinite labour; for I was fain to dip for it into the water,
a work which fatigued me very much.  After this, I went every day on
board, and brought away what I could get.

I had been now thirteen days on shore, and had been eleven times on board
the ship, in which time I had brought away all that one pair of hands
could well be supposed capable to bring; though I believe verily, had the
calm weather held, I should have brought away the whole ship, piece by
piece.  But preparing the twelfth time to go on board, I found the wind
began to rise: however, at low water I went on board, and though I
thought I had rummaged the cabin so effectually that nothing more could
be found, yet I discovered a locker with drawers in it, in one of which I
found two or three razors, and one pair of large scissors, with some ten
or a dozen of good knives and forks: in another I found about thirty-six
pounds value in money—some European coin, some Brazil, some pieces of
eight, some gold, and some silver.

I smiled to myself at the sight of this money: “O drug!” said I, aloud,
“what art thou good for?  Thou art not worth to me—no, not the taking off
the ground; one of those knives is worth all this heap; I have no manner
of use for thee—e’en remain where thou art, and go to the bottom as a
creature whose life is not worth saying.”  However, upon second thoughts
I took it away; and wrapping all this in a piece of canvas, I began to
think of making another raft; but while I was preparing this, I found the
sky overcast, and the wind began to rise, and in a quarter of an hour it
blew a fresh gale from the shore.  It presently occurred to me that it
was in vain to pretend to make a raft with the wind offshore; and that it
was my business to be gone before the tide of flood began, otherwise I
might not be able to reach the shore at all.  Accordingly, I let myself
down into the water, and swam across the channel, which lay between the
ship and the sands, and even that with difficulty enough, partly with the
weight of the things I had about me, and partly the roughness of the
water; for the wind rose very hastily, and before it was quite high water
it blew a storm.

But I had got home to my little tent, where I lay, with all my wealth
about me, very secure.  It blew very hard all night, and in the morning,
when I looked out, behold, no more ship was to be seen!  I was a little
surprised, but recovered myself with the satisfactory reflection that I
had lost no time, nor abated any diligence, to get everything out of her
that could be useful to me; and that, indeed, there was little left in
her that I was able to bring away, if I had had more time.

I now gave over any more thoughts of the ship, or of anything out of her,
except what might drive on shore from her wreck; as, indeed, divers
pieces of her afterwards did; but those things were of small use to me.

My thoughts were now wholly employed about securing myself against either
savages, if any should appear, or wild beasts, if any were in the island;
and I had many thoughts of the method how to do this, and what kind of
dwelling to make—whether I should make me a cave in the earth, or a tent
upon the earth; and, in short, I resolved upon both; the manner and
description of which, it may not be improper to give an account of.

I soon found the place I was in was not fit for my settlement, because it
was upon a low, moorish ground, near the sea, and I believed it would not
be wholesome, and more particularly because there was no fresh water near
it; so I resolved to find a more healthy and more convenient spot of
ground.

I consulted several things in my situation, which I found would be proper
for me: 1st, health and fresh water, I just now mentioned; 2ndly, shelter
from the heat of the sun; 3rdly, security from ravenous creatures,
whether man or beast; 4thly, a view to the sea, that if God sent any ship
in sight, I might not lose any advantage for my deliverance, of which I
was not willing to banish all my expectation yet.

In search of a place proper for this, I found a little plain on the side
of a rising hill, whose front towards this little plain was steep as a
house-side, so that nothing could come down upon me from the top.  On the
one side of the rock there was a hollow place, worn a little way in, like
the entrance or door of a cave but there was not really any cave or way
into the rock at all.

On the flat of the green, just before this hollow place, I resolved to
pitch my tent.  This plain was not above a hundred yards broad, and about
twice as long, and lay like a green before my door; and, at the end of
it, descended irregularly every way down into the low ground by the
seaside.  It was on the N.N.W. side of the hill; so that it was sheltered
from the heat every day, till it came to a W. and by S. sun, or
thereabouts, which, in those countries, is near the setting.

Before I set up my tent I drew a half-circle before the hollow place,
which took in about ten yards in its semi-diameter from the rock, and
twenty yards in its diameter from its beginning and ending.

In this half-circle I pitched two rows of strong stakes, driving them
into the ground till they stood very firm like piles, the biggest end
being out of the ground above five feet and a half, and sharpened on the
top.  The two rows did not stand above six inches from one another.

Then I took the pieces of cable which I had cut in the ship, and laid
them in rows, one upon another, within the circle, between these two rows
of stakes, up to the top, placing other stakes in the inside, leaning
against them, about two feet and a half high, like a spur to a post; and
this fence was so strong, that neither man nor beast could get into it or
over it.  This cost me a great deal of time and labour, especially to cut
the piles in the woods, bring them to the place, and drive them into the
earth.

The entrance into this place I made to be, not by a door, but by a short
ladder to go over the top; which ladder, when I was in, I lifted over
after me; and so I was completely fenced in and fortified, as I thought,
from all the world, and consequently slept secure in the night, which
otherwise I could not have done; though, as it appeared afterwards, there
was no need of all this caution from the enemies that I apprehended
danger from.

Into this fence or fortress, with infinite labour, I carried all my
riches, all my provisions, ammunition, and stores, of which you have the
account above; and I made a large tent, which to preserve me from the
rains that in one part of the year are very violent there, I made
double—one smaller tent within, and one larger tent above it; and covered
the uppermost with a large tarpaulin, which I had saved among the sails.

And now I lay no more for a while in the bed which I had brought on
shore, but in a hammock, which was indeed a very good one, and belonged
to the mate of the ship.

Into this tent I brought all my provisions, and everything that would
spoil by the wet; and having thus enclosed all my goods, I made up the
entrance, which till now I had left open, and so passed and repassed, as
I said, by a short ladder.

When I had done this, I began to work my way into the rock, and bringing
all the earth and stones that I dug down out through my tent, I laid them
up within my fence, in the nature of a terrace, so that it raised the
ground within about a foot and a half; and thus I made me a cave, just
behind my tent, which served me like a cellar to my house.

It cost me much labour and many days before all these things were brought
to perfection; and therefore I must go back to some other things which
took up some of my thoughts.  At the same time it happened, after I had
laid my scheme for the setting up my tent, and making the cave, that a
storm of rain falling from a thick, dark cloud, a sudden flash of
lightning happened, and after that a great clap of thunder, as is
naturally the effect of it.  I was not so much surprised with the
lightning as I was with the thought which darted into my mind as swift as
the lightning itself—Oh, my powder!  My very heart sank within me when I
thought that, at one blast, all my powder might be destroyed; on which,
not my defence only, but the providing my food, as I thought, entirely
depended.  I was nothing near so anxious about my own danger, though, had
the powder took fire, I should never have known who had hurt me.

Such impression did this make upon me, that after the storm was over I
laid aside all my works, my building and fortifying, and applied myself
to make bags and boxes, to separate the powder, and to keep it a little
and a little in a parcel, in the hope that, whatever might come, it might
not all take fire at once; and to keep it so apart that it should not be
possible to make one part fire another.  I finished this work in about a
fortnight; and I think my powder, which in all was about two hundred and
forty pounds weight, was divided in not less than a hundred parcels.  As
to the barrel that had been wet, I did not apprehend any danger from
that; so I placed it in my new cave, which, in my fancy, I called my
kitchen; and the rest I hid up and down in holes among the rocks, so that
no wet might come to it, marking very carefully where I laid it.

In the interval of time while this was doing, I went out once at least
every day with my gun, as well to divert myself as to see if I could kill
anything fit for food; and, as near as I could, to acquaint myself with
what the island produced.  The first time I went out, I presently
discovered that there were goats in the island, which was a great
satisfaction to me; but then it was attended with this misfortune to
me—viz. that they were so shy, so subtle, and so swift of foot, that it
was the most difficult thing in the world to come at them; but I was not
discouraged at this, not doubting but I might now and then shoot one, as
it soon happened; for after I had found their haunts a little, I laid
wait in this manner for them: I observed if they saw me in the valleys,
though they were upon the rocks, they would run away, as in a terrible
fright; but if they were feeding in the valleys, and I was upon the
rocks, they took no notice of me; from whence I concluded that, by the
position of their optics, their sight was so directed downward that they
did not readily see objects that were above them; so afterwards I took
this method—I always climbed the rocks first, to get above them, and then
had frequently a fair mark.

The first shot I made among these creatures, I killed a she-goat, which
had a little kid by her, which she gave suck to, which grieved me
heartily; for when the old one fell, the kid stood stock still by her,
till I came and took her up; and not only so, but when I carried the old
one with me, upon my shoulders, the kid followed me quite to my
enclosure; upon which I laid down the dam, and took the kid in my arms,
and carried it over my pale, in hopes to have bred it up tame; but it
would not eat; so I was forced to kill it and eat it myself.  These two
supplied me with flesh a great while, for I ate sparingly, and saved my
provisions, my bread especially, as much as possibly I could.

Having now fixed my habitation, I found it absolutely necessary to
provide a place to make a fire in, and fuel to burn: and what I did for
that, and also how I enlarged my cave, and what conveniences I made, I
shall give a full account of in its place; but I must now give some
little account of myself, and of my thoughts about living, which, it may
well be supposed, were not a few.

I had a dismal prospect of my condition; for as I was not cast away upon
that island without being driven, as is said, by a violent storm, quite
out of the course of our intended voyage, and a great way, viz. some
hundreds of leagues, out of the ordinary course of the trade of mankind,
I had great reason to consider it as a determination of Heaven, that in
this desolate place, and in this desolate manner, I should end my life.
The tears would run plentifully down my face when I made these
reflections; and sometimes I would expostulate with myself why Providence
should thus completely ruin His creatures, and render them so absolutely
miserable; so without help, abandoned, so entirely depressed, that it
could hardly be rational to be thankful for such a life.

But something always returned swift upon me to check these thoughts, and
to reprove me; and particularly one day, walking with my gun in my hand
by the seaside, I was very pensive upon the subject of my present
condition, when reason, as it were, expostulated with me the other way,
thus: “Well, you are in a desolate condition, it is true; but, pray
remember, where are the rest of you?  Did not you come, eleven of you in
the boat?  Where are the ten?  Why were they not saved, and you lost?
Why were you singled out?  Is it better to be here or there?”  And then I
pointed to the sea.  All evils are to be considered with the good that is
in them, and with what worse attends them.

Then it occurred to me again, how well I was furnished for my
subsistence, and what would have been my case if it had not happened
(which was a hundred thousand to one) that the ship floated from the
place where she first struck, and was driven so near to the shore that I
had time to get all these things out of her; what would have been my
case, if I had been forced to have lived in the condition in which I at
first came on shore, without necessaries of life, or necessaries to
supply and procure them?  “Particularly,” said I, aloud (though to
myself), “what should I have done without a gun, without ammunition,
without any tools to make anything, or to work with, without clothes,
bedding, a tent, or any manner of covering?” and that now I had all these
to sufficient quantity, and was in a fair way to provide myself in such a
manner as to live without my gun, when my ammunition was spent: so that I
had a tolerable view of subsisting, without any want, as long as I lived;
for I considered from the beginning how I would provide for the accidents
that might happen, and for the time that was to come, even not only after
my ammunition should be spent, but even after my health and strength
should decay.

I confess I had not entertained any notion of my ammunition being
destroyed at one blast—I mean my powder being blown up by lightning; and
this made the thoughts of it so surprising to me, when it lightened and
thundered, as I observed just now.

And now being about to enter into a melancholy relation of a scene of
silent life, such, perhaps, as was never heard of in the world before, I
shall take it from its beginning, and continue it in its order.  It was
by my account the 30th of September, when, in the manner as above said, I
first set foot upon this horrid island; when the sun, being to us in its
autumnal equinox, was almost over my head; for I reckoned myself, by
observation, to be in the latitude of nine degrees twenty-two minutes
north of the line.

After I had been there about ten or twelve days, it came into my thoughts
that I should lose my reckoning of time for want of books, and pen and
ink, and should even forget the Sabbath days; but to prevent this, I cut
with my knife upon a large post, in capital letters—and making it into a
great cross, I set it up on the shore where I first landed—“I came on
shore here on the 30th September 1659.”

Upon the sides of this square post I cut every day a notch with my knife,
and every seventh notch was as long again as the rest, and every first
day of the month as long again as that long one; and thus I kept my
calendar, or weekly, monthly, and yearly reckoning of time.

In the next place, we are to observe that among the many things which I
brought out of the ship, in the several voyages which, as above
mentioned, I made to it, I got several things of less value, but not at
all less useful to me, which I omitted setting down before; as, in
particular, pens, ink, and paper, several parcels in the captain’s,
mate’s, gunner’s and carpenter’s keeping; three or four compasses, some
mathematical instruments, dials, perspectives, charts, and books of
navigation, all which I huddled together, whether I might want them or
no; also, I found three very good Bibles, which came to me in my cargo
from England, and which I had packed up among my things; some Portuguese
books also; and among them two or three Popish prayer-books, and several
other books, all which I carefully secured.  And I must not forget that
we had in the ship a dog and two cats, of whose eminent history I may
have occasion to say something in its place; for I carried both the cats
with me; and as for the dog, he jumped out of the ship of himself, and
swam on shore to me the day after I went on shore with my first cargo,
and was a trusty servant to me many years; I wanted nothing that he could
fetch me, nor any company that he could make up to me; I only wanted to
have him talk to me, but that would not do.  As I observed before, I
found pens, ink, and paper, and I husbanded them to the utmost; and I
shall show that while my ink lasted, I kept things very exact, but after
that was gone I could not, for I could not make any ink by any means that
I could devise.

And this put me in mind that I wanted many things notwithstanding all
that I had amassed together; and of these, ink was one; as also a spade,
pickaxe, and shovel, to dig or remove the earth; needles, pins, and
thread; as for linen, I soon learned to want that without much
difficulty.

This want of tools made every work I did go on heavily; and it was near a
whole year before I had entirely finished my little pale, or surrounded
my habitation.  The piles, or stakes, which were as heavy as I could well
lift, were a long time in cutting and preparing in the woods, and more,
by far, in bringing home; so that I spent sometimes two days in cutting
and bringing home one of those posts, and a third day in driving it into
the ground; for which purpose I got a heavy piece of wood at first, but
at last bethought myself of one of the iron crows; which, however, though
I found it, made driving those posts or piles very laborious and tedious
work.

But what need I have been concerned at the tediousness of anything
I had to do, seeing I had time enough to do it in? nor had I any other
employment, if that had been over, at least that I could foresee, except
the ranging the island to seek for food, which I did, more or less, every
day.

I now began to consider seriously my condition, and the circumstances I
was reduced to; and I drew up the state of my affairs in writing, not so
much to leave them to any that were to come after me—for I was likely to
have but few heirs—as to deliver my thoughts from daily poring over them,
and afflicting my mind; and as my reason began now to master my
despondency, I began to comfort myself as well as I could, and to set the
good against the evil, that I might have something to distinguish my case
from worse; and I stated very impartially, like debtor and creditor, the
comforts I enjoyed against the miseries I suffered, thus:—

             _Evil_.                             _Good_.
I am cast upon a horrible,          But I am alive; and not drowned,
desolate island, void of all hope   as all my ship’s company were.
of recovery.
I am singled out and separated,     But I am singled out, too, from
as it were, from all the world,     all the ship’s crew, to be spared
to be miserable.                    from death; and He that
                                    miraculously saved me from death
                                    can deliver me from this
                                    condition.
I am divided from mankind—a         But I am not starved, and
solitaire; one banished from        perishing on a barren place,
human society.                      affording no sustenance.
I have no clothes to cover me.      But I am in a hot climate, where,
                                    if I had clothes, I could hardly
                                    wear them.
I am without any defence, or        But I am cast on an island where
means to resist any violence of     I see no wild beasts to hurt me,
man or beast.                       as I saw on the coast of Africa;
                                    and what if I had been
                                    shipwrecked there?
I have no soul to speak to or       But God wonderfully sent the ship
relieve me.                         in near enough to the shore, that
                                    I have got out as many necessary
                                    things as will either supply my
                                    wants or enable me to supply
                                    myself, even as long as I live.

Upon the whole, here was an undoubted testimony that there was scarce any
condition in the world so miserable but there was something negative or
something positive to be thankful for in it; and let this stand as a
direction from the experience of the most miserable of all conditions in
this world: that we may always find in it something to comfort ourselves
from, and to set, in the description of good and evil, on the credit side
of the account.

Having now brought my mind a little to relish my condition, and given
over looking out to sea, to see if I could spy a ship—I say, giving over
these things, I began to apply myself to arrange my way of living, and to
make things as easy to me as I could.

I have already described my habitation, which was a tent under the side
of a rock, surrounded with a strong pale of posts and cables: but I might
now rather call it a wall, for I raised a kind of wall up against it of
turfs, about two feet thick on the outside; and after some time (I think
it was a year and a half) I raised rafters from it, leaning to the rock,
and thatched or covered it with boughs of trees, and such things as I
could get, to keep out the rain; which I found at some times of the year
very violent.

I have already observed how I brought all my goods into this pale, and
into the cave which I had made behind me.  But I must observe, too, that
at first this was a confused heap of goods, which, as they lay in no
order, so they took up all my place; I had no room to turn myself: so I
set myself to enlarge my cave, and work farther into the earth; for it
was a loose sandy rock, which yielded easily to the labour I bestowed on
it: and so when I found I was pretty safe as to beasts of prey, I worked
sideways, to the right hand, into the rock; and then, turning to the
right again, worked quite out, and made me a door to come out on the
outside of my pale or fortification.  This gave me not only egress and
regress, as it was a back way to my tent and to my storehouse, but gave
me room to store my goods.

And now I began to apply myself to make such necessary things as I found
I most wanted, particularly a chair and a table; for without these I was
not able to enjoy the few comforts I had in the world; I could not write
or eat, or do several things, with so much pleasure without a table: so I
went to work.  And here I must needs observe, that as reason is the
substance and origin of the mathematics, so by stating and squaring
everything by reason, and by making the most rational judgment of things,
every man may be, in time, master of every mechanic art.  I had never
handled a tool in my life; and yet, in time, by labour, application, and
contrivance, I found at last that I wanted nothing but I could have made
it, especially if I had had tools.  However, I made abundance of things,
even without tools; and some with no more tools than an adze and a
hatchet, which perhaps were never made that way before, and that with
infinite labour.  For example, if I wanted a board, I had no other way
but to cut down a tree, set it on an edge before me, and hew it flat on
either side with my axe, till I brought it to be thin as a plank, and
then dub it smooth with my adze.  It is true, by this method I could make
but one board out of a whole tree; but this I had no remedy for but
patience, any more than I had for the prodigious deal of time and labour
which it took me up to make a plank or board: but my time or labour was
little worth, and so it was as well employed one way as another.

However, I made me a table and a chair, as I observed above, in the first
place; and this I did out of the short pieces of boards that I brought on
my raft from the ship.  But when I had wrought out some boards as above,
I made large shelves, of the breadth of a foot and a half, one over
another all along one side of my cave, to lay all my tools, nails and
ironwork on; and, in a word, to separate everything at large into their
places, that I might come easily at them.  I knocked pieces into the wall
of the rock to hang my guns and all things that would hang up; so that,
had my cave been to be seen, it looked like a general magazine of all
necessary things; and had everything so ready at my hand, that it was a
great pleasure to me to see all my goods in such order, and especially to
find my stock of all necessaries so great.

And now it was that I began to keep a journal of every day’s employment;
for, indeed, at first I was in too much hurry, and not only hurry as to
labour, but in too much discomposure of mind; and my journal would have
been full of many dull things; for example, I must have said thus:
“30_th_.—After I had got to shore, and escaped drowning, instead of being
thankful to God for my deliverance, having first vomited, with the great
quantity of salt water which had got into my stomach, and recovering
myself a little, I ran about the shore wringing my hands and beating my
head and face, exclaiming at my misery, and crying out, ‘I was undone,
undone!’ till, tired and faint, I was forced to lie down on the ground to
repose, but durst not sleep for fear of being devoured.”

Some days after this, and after I had been on board the ship, and got all
that I could out of her, yet I could not forbear getting up to the top of
a little mountain and looking out to sea, in hopes of seeing a ship; then
fancy at a vast distance I spied a sail, please myself with the hopes of
it, and then after looking steadily, till I was almost blind, lose it
quite, and sit down and weep like a child, and thus increase my misery by
my folly.

But having gotten over these things in some measure, and having settled
my household staff and habitation, made me a table and a chair, and all
as handsome about me as I could, I began to keep my journal; of which I
shall here give you the copy (though in it will be told all these
particulars over again) as long as it lasted; for having no more ink, I
was forced to leave it off.




CHAPTER V—BUILDS A HOUSE—THE JOURNAL


September 30, 1659.—I, poor miserable Robinson Crusoe, being shipwrecked
during a dreadful storm in the offing, came on shore on this dismal,
unfortunate island, which I called “The Island of Despair”; all the rest
of the ship’s company being drowned, and myself almost dead.

All the rest of the day I spent in afflicting myself at the dismal
circumstances I was brought to—viz. I had neither food, house, clothes,
weapon, nor place to fly to; and in despair of any relief, saw nothing
but death before me—either that I should be devoured by wild beasts,
murdered by savages, or starved to death for want of food.  At the
approach of night I slept in a tree, for fear of wild creatures; but
slept soundly, though it rained all night.

_October_ 1.—In the morning I saw, to my great surprise, the ship had
floated with the high tide, and was driven on shore again much nearer the
island; which, as it was some comfort, on one hand—for, seeing her set
upright, and not broken to pieces, I hoped, if the wind abated, I might
get on board, and get some food and necessaries out of her for my
relief—so, on the other hand, it renewed my grief at the loss of my
comrades, who, I imagined, if we had all stayed on board, might have
saved the ship, or, at least, that they would not have been all drowned
as they were; and that, had the men been saved, we might perhaps have
built us a boat out of the ruins of the ship to have carried us to some
other part of the world.  I spent great part of this day in perplexing
myself on these things; but at length, seeing the ship almost dry, I went
upon the sand as near as I could, and then swam on board.  This day also
it continued raining, though with no wind at all.

_From the 1st of October to the 24th_.—All these days entirely spent in
many several voyages to get all I could out of the ship, which I brought
on shore every tide of flood upon rafts.  Much rain also in the days,
though with some intervals of fair weather; but it seems this was the
rainy season.

_Oct._ 20.—I overset my raft, and all the goods I had got upon it; but,
being in shoal water, and the things being chiefly heavy, I recovered
many of them when the tide was out.

_Oct._ 25.—It rained all night and all day, with some gusts of wind;
during which time the ship broke in pieces, the wind blowing a little
harder than before, and was no more to be seen, except the wreck of her,
and that only at low water.  I spent this day in covering and securing
the goods which I had saved, that the rain might not spoil them.

_Oct._ 26.—I walked about the shore almost all day, to find out a place
to fix my habitation, greatly concerned to secure myself from any attack
in the night, either from wild beasts or men.  Towards night, I fixed
upon a proper place, under a rock, and marked out a semicircle for my
encampment; which I resolved to strengthen with a work, wall, or
fortification, made of double piles, lined within with cables, and
without with turf.

From the 26th to the 30th I worked very hard in carrying all my goods to
my new habitation, though some part of the time it rained exceedingly
hard.

The 31st, in the morning, I went out into the island with my gun, to seek
for some food, and discover the country; when I killed a she-goat, and
her kid followed me home, which I afterwards killed also, because it
would not feed.

_November_ 1.—I set up my tent under a rock, and lay there for the first
night; making it as large as I could, with stakes driven in to swing my
hammock upon.

_Nov._ 2.—I set up all my chests and boards, and the pieces of timber
which made my rafts, and with them formed a fence round me, a little
within the place I had marked out for my fortification.

_Nov._ 3.—I went out with my gun, and killed two fowls like ducks, which
were very good food.  In the afternoon went to work to make me a table.

_Nov_. 4.—This morning I began to order my times of work, of going out
with my gun, time of sleep, and time of diversion—viz. every morning I
walked out with my gun for two or three hours, if it did not rain; then
employed myself to work till about eleven o’clock; then eat what I had to
live on; and from twelve to two I lay down to sleep, the weather being
excessively hot; and then, in the evening, to work again.  The working
part of this day and of the next were wholly employed in making my table,
for I was yet but a very sorry workman, though time and necessity made me
a complete natural mechanic soon after, as I believe they would do any
one else.

_Nov._ 5.—This day went abroad with my gun and my dog, and killed a wild
cat; her skin pretty soft, but her flesh good for nothing; every creature
that I killed I took of the skins and preserved them.  Coming back by the
sea-shore, I saw many sorts of sea-fowls, which I did not understand; but
was surprised, and almost frightened, with two or three seals, which,
while I was gazing at, not well knowing what they were, got into the sea,
and escaped me for that time.

_Nov._ 6.—After my morning walk I went to work with my table again, and
finished it, though not to my liking; nor was it long before I learned to
mend it.

_Nov._ 7.—Now it began to be settled fair weather.  The 7th, 8th, 9th,
10th, and part of the 12th (for the 11th was Sunday) I took wholly up to
make me a chair, and with much ado brought it to a tolerable shape, but
never to please me; and even in the making I pulled it in pieces several
times.

_Note_.—I soon neglected my keeping Sundays; for, omitting my mark for
them on my post, I forgot which was which.

_Nov._ 13.—This day it rained, which refreshed me exceedingly, and cooled
the earth; but it was accompanied with terrible thunder and lightning,
which frightened me dreadfully, for fear of my powder.  As soon as it was
over, I resolved to separate my stock of powder into as many little
parcels as possible, that it might not be in danger.

_Nov._ 14, 15, 16.—These three days I spent in making little square
chests, or boxes, which might hold about a pound, or two pounds at most,
of powder; and so, putting the powder in, I stowed it in places as secure
and remote from one another as possible.  On one of these three days I
killed a large bird that was good to eat, but I knew not what to call it.

_Nov._ 17.—This day I began to dig behind my tent into the rock, to make
room for my further conveniency.

_Note_.—Three things I wanted exceedingly for this work—viz. a pickaxe, a
shovel, and a wheelbarrow or basket; so I desisted from my work, and
began to consider how to supply that want, and make me some tools.  As
for the pickaxe, I made use of the iron crows, which were proper enough,
though heavy; but the next thing was a shovel or spade; this was so
absolutely necessary, that, indeed, I could do nothing effectually
without it; but what kind of one to make I knew not.

_Nov._ 18.—The next day, in searching the woods, I found a tree of that
wood, or like it, which in the Brazils they call the iron-tree, for its
exceeding hardness.  Of this, with great labour, and almost spoiling my
axe, I cut a piece, and brought it home, too, with difficulty enough, for
it was exceeding heavy.  The excessive hardness of the wood, and my
having no other way, made me a long while upon this machine, for I worked
it effectually by little and little into the form of a shovel or spade;
the handle exactly shaped like ours in England, only that the board part
having no iron shod upon it at bottom, it would not last me so long;
however, it served well enough for the uses which I had occasion to put
it to; but never was a shovel, I believe, made after that fashion, or so
long in making.

I was still deficient, for I wanted a basket or a wheelbarrow.  A basket
I could not make by any means, having no such things as twigs that would
bend to make wicker-ware—at least, none yet found out; and as to a
wheelbarrow, I fancied I could make all but the wheel; but that I had no
notion of; neither did I know how to go about it; besides, I had no
possible way to make the iron gudgeons for the spindle or axis of the
wheel to run in; so I gave it over, and so, for carrying away the earth
which I dug out of the cave, I made me a thing like a hod which the
labourers carry mortar in when they serve the bricklayers.  This was not
so difficult to me as the making the shovel: and yet this and the shovel,
and the attempt which I made in vain to make a wheelbarrow, took me up no
less than four days—I mean always excepting my morning walk with my gun,
which I seldom failed, and very seldom failed also bringing home
something fit to eat.

_Nov._ 23.—My other work having now stood still, because of my making
these tools, when they were finished I went on, and working every day, as
my strength and time allowed, I spent eighteen days entirely in widening
and deepening my cave, that it might hold my goods commodiously.

_Note_.—During all this time I worked to make this room or cave spacious
enough to accommodate me as a warehouse or magazine, a kitchen, a
dining-room, and a cellar.  As for my lodging, I kept to the tent; except
that sometimes, in the wet season of the year, it rained so hard that I
could not keep myself dry, which caused me afterwards to cover all my
place within my pale with long poles, in the form of rafters, leaning
against the rock, and load them with flags and large leaves of trees,
like a thatch.

_December_ 10.—I began now to think my cave or vault finished, when on a
sudden (it seems I had made it too large) a great quantity of earth fell
down from the top on one side; so much that, in short, it frighted me,
and not without reason, too, for if I had been under it, I had never
wanted a gravedigger.  I had now a great deal of work to do over again,
for I had the loose earth to carry out; and, which was of more
importance, I had the ceiling to prop up, so that I might be sure no more
would come down.

_Dec_. 11.—This day I went to work with it accordingly, and got two
shores or posts pitched upright to the top, with two pieces of boards
across over each post; this I finished the next day; and setting more
posts up with boards, in about a week more I had the roof secured, and
the posts, standing in rows, served me for partitions to part off the
house.

_Dec._ 17.—From this day to the 20th I placed shelves, and knocked up
nails on the posts, to hang everything up that could be hung up; and now
I began to be in some order within doors.

_Dec._ 20.—Now I carried everything into the cave, and began to furnish
my house, and set up some pieces of boards like a dresser, to order my
victuals upon; but boards began to be very scarce with me; also, I made
me another table.

_Dec._ 24.—Much rain all night and all day.  No stirring out.

_Dec._ 25.—Rain all day.

_Dec._ 26.—No rain, and the earth much cooler than before, and
pleasanter.

_Dec._ 27.—Killed a young goat, and lamed another, so that I caught it
and led it home in a string; when I had it at home, I bound and
splintered up its leg, which was broke.

_N.B._—I took such care of it that it lived, and the leg grew well and as
strong as ever; but, by my nursing it so long, it grew tame, and fed upon
the little green at my door, and would not go away.  This was the first
time that I entertained a thought of breeding up some tame creatures,
that I might have food when my powder and shot was all spent.

_Dec._ 28, 29, 30.—Great heats and no breeze, so that there was no
stirring abroad except in the evening for food; this time I spent in
putting all my things in order within doors.

_January_ 1.—Very hot still: but I went abroad early and late with my
gun, and lay still in the middle of the day.  This evening, going farther
into the valleys which lay towards the centre of the island, I found
there were plenty of goats, though exceedingly shy, and hard to come at;
however, I resolved to try if I could not bring my dog to hunt them down.

_Jan._ 2.—Accordingly, the next day I went out with my dog, and set him
upon the goats, but I was mistaken, for they all faced about upon the
dog, and he knew his danger too well, for he would not come near them.

_Jan._ 3.—I began my fence or wall; which, being still jealous of my
being attacked by somebody, I resolved to make very thick and strong.

_N.B._—This wall being described before, I purposely omit what was said
in the journal; it is sufficient to observe, that I was no less time than
from the 2nd of January to the 14th of April working, finishing, and
perfecting this wall, though it was no more than about twenty-four yards
in length, being a half-circle from one place in the rock to another
place, about eight yards from it, the door of the cave being in the
centre behind it.

All this time I worked very hard, the rains hindering me many days, nay,
sometimes weeks together; but I thought I should never be perfectly
secure till this wall was finished; and it is scarce credible what
inexpressible labour everything was done with, especially the bringing
piles out of the woods and driving them into the ground; for I made them
much bigger than I needed to have done.

When this wall was finished, and the outside double fenced, with a turf
wall raised up close to it, I perceived myself that if any people were to
come on shore there, they would not perceive anything like a habitation;
and it was very well I did so, as may be observed hereafter, upon a very
remarkable occasion.

During this time I made my rounds in the woods for game every day when
the rain permitted me, and made frequent discoveries in these walks of
something or other to my advantage; particularly, I found a kind of wild
pigeons, which build, not as wood-pigeons in a tree, but rather as
house-pigeons, in the holes of the rocks; and taking some young ones, I
endeavoured to breed them up tame, and did so; but when they grew older
they flew away, which perhaps was at first for want of feeding them, for
I had nothing to give them; however, I frequently found their nests, and
got their young ones, which were very good meat.  And now, in the
managing my household affairs, I found myself wanting in many things,
which I thought at first it was impossible for me to make; as, indeed,
with some of them it was: for instance, I could never make a cask to be
hooped.  I had a small runlet or two, as I observed before; but I could
never arrive at the capacity of making one by them, though I spent many
weeks about it; I could neither put in the heads, or join the staves so
true to one another as to make them hold water; so I gave that also over.
In the next place, I was at a great loss for candles; so that as soon as
ever it was dark, which was generally by seven o’clock, I was obliged to
go to bed.  I remembered the lump of beeswax with which I made candles in
my African adventure; but I had none of that now; the only remedy I had
was, that when I had killed a goat I saved the tallow, and with a little
dish made of clay, which I baked in the sun, to which I added a wick of
some oakum, I made me a lamp; and this gave me light, though not a clear,
steady light, like a candle.  In the middle of all my labours it happened
that, rummaging my things, I found a little bag which, as I hinted
before, had been filled with corn for the feeding of poultry—not for this
voyage, but before, as I suppose, when the ship came from Lisbon.  The
little remainder of corn that had been in the bag was all devoured by the
rats, and I saw nothing in the bag but husks and dust; and being willing
to have the bag for some other use (I think it was to put powder in, when
I divided it for fear of the lightning, or some such use), I shook the
husks of corn out of it on one side of my fortification, under the rock.

It was a little before the great rains just now mentioned that I threw
this stuff away, taking no notice, and not so much as remembering that I
had thrown anything there, when, about a month after, or thereabouts, I
saw some few stalks of something green shooting out of the ground, which
I fancied might be some plant I had not seen; but I was surprised, and
perfectly astonished, when, after a little longer time, I saw about ten
or twelve ears come out, which were perfect green barley, of the same
kind as our European—nay, as our English barley.

It is impossible to express the astonishment and confusion of my thoughts
on this occasion.  I had hitherto acted upon no religious foundation at
all; indeed, I had very few notions of religion in my head, nor had
entertained any sense of anything that had befallen me otherwise than as
chance, or, as we lightly say, what pleases God, without so much as
inquiring into the end of Providence in these things, or His order in
governing events for the world.  But after I saw barley grow there, in a
climate which I knew was not proper for corn, and especially that I knew
not how it came there, it startled me strangely, and I began to suggest
that God had miraculously caused His grain to grow without any help of
seed sown, and that it was so directed purely for my sustenance on that
wild, miserable place.

This touched my heart a little, and brought tears out of my eyes, and I
began to bless myself that such a prodigy of nature should happen upon my
account; and this was the more strange to me, because I saw near it
still, all along by the side of the rock, some other straggling stalks,
which proved to be stalks of rice, and which I knew, because I had seen
it grow in Africa when I was ashore there.

I not only thought these the pure productions of Providence for my
support, but not doubting that there was more in the place, I went all
over that part of the island, where I had been before, peering in every
corner, and under every rock, to see for more of it, but I could not find
any.  At last it occurred to my thoughts that I shook a bag of chickens’
meat out in that place; and then the wonder began to cease; and I must
confess my religious thankfulness to God’s providence began to abate,
too, upon the discovering that all this was nothing but what was common;
though I ought to have been as thankful for so strange and unforeseen a
providence as if it had been miraculous; for it was really the work of
Providence to me, that should order or appoint that ten or twelve grains
of corn should remain unspoiled, when the rats had destroyed all the
rest, as if it had been dropped from heaven; as also, that I should throw
it out in that particular place, where, it being in the shade of a high
rock, it sprang up immediately; whereas, if I had thrown it anywhere else
at that time, it had been burnt up and destroyed.

I carefully saved the ears of this corn, you may be sure, in their
season, which was about the end of June; and, laying up every corn, I
resolved to sow them all again, hoping in time to have some quantity
sufficient to supply me with bread.  But it was not till the fourth year
that I could allow myself the least grain of this corn to eat, and even
then but sparingly, as I shall say afterwards, in its order; for I lost
all that I sowed the first season by not observing the proper time; for I
sowed it just before the dry season, so that it never came up at all, at
least not as it would have done; of which in its place.

Besides this barley, there were, as above, twenty or thirty stalks of
rice, which I preserved with the same care and for the same use, or to
the same purpose—to make me bread, or rather food; for I found ways to
cook it without baking, though I did that also after some time.

But to return to my Journal.

I worked excessive hard these three or four months to get my wall done;
and the 14th of April I closed it up, contriving to go into it, not by a
door but over the wall, by a ladder, that there might be no sign on the
outside of my habitation.

_April_ 16.—I finished the ladder; so I went up the ladder to the top,
and then pulled it up after me, and let it down in the inside.  This was
a complete enclosure to me; for within I had room enough, and nothing
could come at me from without, unless it could first mount my wall.

The very next day after this wall was finished I had almost had all my
labour overthrown at once, and myself killed.  The case was thus: As I
was busy in the inside, behind my tent, just at the entrance into my
cave, I was terribly frighted with a most dreadful, surprising thing
indeed; for all on a sudden I found the earth come crumbling down from
the roof of my cave, and from the edge of the hill over my head, and two
of the posts I had set up in the cave cracked in a frightful manner.  I
was heartily scared; but thought nothing of what was really the cause,
only thinking that the top of my cave was fallen in, as some of it had
done before: and for fear I should be buried in it I ran forward to my
ladder, and not thinking myself safe there neither, I got over my wall
for fear of the pieces of the hill, which I expected might roll down upon
me.  I had no sooner stepped down upon the firm ground, than I plainly
saw it was a terrible earthquake, for the ground I stood on shook three
times at about eight minutes’ distance, with three such shocks as would
have overturned the strongest building that could be supposed to have
stood on the earth; and a great piece of the top of a rock which stood
about half a mile from me next the sea fell down with such a terrible
noise as I never heard in all my life.  I perceived also the very sea was
put into violent motion by it; and I believe the shocks were stronger
under the water than on the island.

I was so much amazed with the thing itself, having never felt the like,
nor discoursed with any one that had, that I was like one dead or
stupefied; and the motion of the earth made my stomach sick, like one
that was tossed at sea; but the noise of the falling of the rock awakened
me, as it were, and rousing me from the stupefied condition I was in,
filled me with horror; and I thought of nothing then but the hill falling
upon my tent and all my household goods, and burying all at once; and
this sunk my very soul within me a second time.

After the third shock was over, and I felt no more for some time, I began
to take courage; and yet I had not heart enough to go over my wall again,
for fear of being buried alive, but sat still upon the ground greatly
cast down and disconsolate, not knowing what to do.  All this while I had
not the least serious religious thought; nothing but the common “Lord
have mercy upon me!” and when it was over that went away too.

While I sat thus, I found the air overcast and grow cloudy, as if it
would rain.  Soon after that the wind arose by little and little, so that
in less than half-an-hour it blew a most dreadful hurricane; the sea was
all on a sudden covered over with foam and froth; the shore was covered
with the breach of the water, the trees were torn up by the roots, and a
terrible storm it was.  This held about three hours, and then began to
abate; and in two hours more it was quite calm, and began to rain very
hard.  All this while I sat upon the ground very much terrified and
dejected; when on a sudden it came into my thoughts, that these winds and
rain being the consequences of the earthquake, the earthquake itself was
spent and over, and I might venture into my cave again.  With this
thought my spirits began to revive; and the rain also helping to persuade
me, I went in and sat down in my tent.  But the rain was so violent that
my tent was ready to be beaten down with it; and I was forced to go into
my cave, though very much afraid and uneasy, for fear it should fall on
my head.  This violent rain forced me to a new work—viz. to cut a hole
through my new fortification, like a sink, to let the water go out, which
would else have flooded my cave.  After I had been in my cave for some
time, and found still no more shocks of the earthquake follow, I began to
be more composed.  And now, to support my spirits, which indeed wanted it
very much, I went to my little store, and took a small sup of rum; which,
however, I did then and always very sparingly, knowing I could have no
more when that was gone.  It continued raining all that night and great
part of the next day, so that I could not stir abroad; but my mind being
more composed, I began to think of what I had best do; concluding that if
the island was subject to these earthquakes, there would be no living for
me in a cave, but I must consider of building a little hut in an open
place which I might surround with a wall, as I had done here, and so make
myself secure from wild beasts or men; for I concluded, if I stayed where
I was, I should certainly one time or other be buried alive.

With these thoughts, I resolved to remove my tent from the place where it
stood, which was just under the hanging precipice of the hill; and which,
if it should be shaken again, would certainly fall upon my tent; and I
spent the two next days, being the 19th and 20th of April, in contriving
where and how to remove my habitation.  The fear of being swallowed up
alive made me that I never slept in quiet; and yet the apprehension of
lying abroad without any fence was almost equal to it; but still, when I
looked about, and saw how everything was put in order, how pleasantly
concealed I was, and how safe from danger, it made me very loath to
remove.  In the meantime, it occurred to me that it would require a vast
deal of time for me to do this, and that I must be contented to venture
where I was, till I had formed a camp for myself, and had secured it so
as to remove to it.  So with this resolution I composed myself for a
time, and resolved that I would go to work with all speed to build me a
wall with piles and cables, &c., in a circle, as before, and set my tent
up in it when it was finished; but that I would venture to stay where I
was till it was finished, and fit to remove.  This was the 21st.

_April_ 22.—The next morning I begin to consider of means to put this
resolve into execution; but I was at a great loss about my tools.  I had
three large axes, and abundance of hatchets (for we carried the hatchets
for traffic with the Indians); but with much chopping and cutting knotty
hard wood, they were all full of notches, and dull; and though I had a
grindstone, I could not turn it and grind my tools too.  This cost me as
much thought as a statesman would have bestowed upon a grand point of
politics, or a judge upon the life and death of a man.  At length I
contrived a wheel with a string, to turn it with my foot, that I might
have both my hands at liberty.  _Note_.—I had never seen any such thing
in England, or at least, not to take notice how it was done, though since
I have observed, it is very common there; besides that, my grindstone was
very large and heavy.  This machine cost me a full week’s work to bring
it to perfection.

_April_ 28, 29.—These two whole days I took up in grinding my tools, my
machine for turning my grindstone performing very well.

_April_ 30.—Having perceived my bread had been low a great while, now I
took a survey of it, and reduced myself to one biscuit cake a day, which
made my heart very heavy.

_May_ 1.—In the morning, looking towards the sea side, the tide being
low, I saw something lie on the shore bigger than ordinary, and it looked
like a cask; when I came to it, I found a small barrel, and two or three
pieces of the wreck of the ship, which were driven on shore by the late
hurricane; and looking towards the wreck itself, I thought it seemed to
lie higher out of the water than it used to do.  I examined the barrel
which was driven on shore, and soon found it was a barrel of gunpowder;
but it had taken water, and the powder was caked as hard as a stone;
however, I rolled it farther on shore for the present, and went on upon
the sands, as near as I could to the wreck of the ship, to look for more.




CHAPTER VI—ILL AND CONSCIENCE-STRICKEN


When I came down to the ship I found it strangely removed.  The
forecastle, which lay before buried in sand, was heaved up at least six
feet, and the stern, which was broke in pieces and parted from the rest
by the force of the sea, soon after I had left rummaging her, was tossed
as it were up, and cast on one side; and the sand was thrown so high on
that side next her stern, that whereas there was a great place of water
before, so that I could not come within a quarter of a mile of the wreck
without swimming I could now walk quite up to her when the tide was out.
I was surprised with this at first, but soon concluded it must be done by
the earthquake; and as by this violence the ship was more broke open than
formerly, so many things came daily on shore, which the sea had loosened,
and which the winds and water rolled by degrees to the land.

This wholly diverted my thoughts from the design of removing my
habitation, and I busied myself mightily, that day especially, in
searching whether I could make any way into the ship; but I found nothing
was to be expected of that kind, for all the inside of the ship was
choked up with sand.  However, as I had learned not to despair of
anything, I resolved to pull everything to pieces that I could of the
ship, concluding that everything I could get from her would be of some
use or other to me.

_May_ 3.—I began with my saw, and cut a piece of a beam through, which I
thought held some of the upper part or quarter-deck together, and when I
had cut it through, I cleared away the sand as well as I could from the
side which lay highest; but the tide coming in, I was obliged to give
over for that time.

_May_ 4.—I went a-fishing, but caught not one fish that I durst eat of,
till I was weary of my sport; when, just going to leave off, I caught a
young dolphin.  I had made me a long line of some rope-yarn, but I had no
hooks; yet I frequently caught fish enough, as much as I cared to eat;
all which I dried in the sun, and ate them dry.

_May_ 5.—Worked on the wreck; cut another beam asunder, and brought three
great fir planks off from the decks, which I tied together, and made to
float on shore when the tide of flood came on.

_May_ 6.—Worked on the wreck; got several iron bolts out of her and other
pieces of ironwork.  Worked very hard, and came home very much tired, and
had thoughts of giving it over.

_May_ 7.—Went to the wreck again, not with an intent to work, but found
the weight of the wreck had broke itself down, the beams being cut; that
several pieces of the ship seemed to lie loose, and the inside of the
hold lay so open that I could see into it; but it was almost full of
water and sand.

_May_ 8.—Went to the wreck, and carried an iron crow to wrench up the
deck, which lay now quite clear of the water or sand.  I wrenched open
two planks, and brought them on shore also with the tide.  I left the
iron crow in the wreck for next day.

_May_ 9.—Went to the wreck, and with the crow made way into the body of
the wreck, and felt several casks, and loosened them with the crow, but
could not break them up.  I felt also a roll of English lead, and could
stir it, but it was too heavy to remove.

_May_ 10–14.—Went every day to the wreck; and got a great many pieces of
timber, and boards, or plank, and two or three hundredweight of iron.

_May_ 15.—I carried two hatchets, to try if I could not cut a piece off
the roll of lead by placing the edge of one hatchet and driving it with
the other; but as it lay about a foot and a half in the water, I could
not make any blow to drive the hatchet.

_May_ 16.—It had blown hard in the night, and the wreck appeared more
broken by the force of the water; but I stayed so long in the woods, to
get pigeons for food, that the tide prevented my going to the wreck that
day.

_May_ 17.—I saw some pieces of the wreck blown on shore, at a great
distance, near two miles off me, but resolved to see what they were, and
found it was a piece of the head, but too heavy for me to bring away.

_May_ 24.—Every day, to this day, I worked on the wreck; and with hard
labour I loosened some things so much with the crow, that the first
flowing tide several casks floated out, and two of the seamen’s chests;
but the wind blowing from the shore, nothing came to land that day but
pieces of timber, and a hogshead, which had some Brazil pork in it; but
the salt water and the sand had spoiled it.  I continued this work every
day to the 15th of June, except the time necessary to get food, which I
always appointed, during this part of my employment, to be when the tide
was up, that I might be ready when it was ebbed out; and by this time I
had got timber and plank and ironwork enough to have built a good boat,
if I had known how; and also I got, at several times and in several
pieces, near one hundredweight of the sheet lead.

_June_ 16.—Going down to the seaside, I found a large tortoise or turtle.
This was the first I had seen, which, it seems, was only my misfortune,
not any defect of the place, or scarcity; for had I happened to be on the
other side of the island, I might have had hundreds of them every day, as
I found afterwards; but perhaps had paid dear enough for them.

_June_ 17.—I spent in cooking the turtle.  I found in her three-score
eggs; and her flesh was to me, at that time, the most savoury and
pleasant that ever I tasted in my life, having had no flesh, but of goats
and fowls, since I landed in this horrid place.

_June_ 18.—Rained all day, and I stayed within.  I thought at this time
the rain felt cold, and I was something chilly; which I knew was not
usual in that latitude.

_June_ 19.—Very ill, and shivering, as if the weather had been cold.

_June_ 20.—No rest all night; violent pains in my head, and feverish.

_June_ 21.—Very ill; frighted almost to death with the apprehensions of
my sad condition—to be sick, and no help.  Prayed to God, for the first
time since the storm off Hull, but scarce knew what I said, or why, my
thoughts being all confused.

_June_ 22.—A little better; but under dreadful apprehensions of sickness.

_June_ 23.—Very bad again; cold and shivering, and then a violent
headache.

_June_ 24.—Much better.

_June_ 25.—An ague very violent; the fit held me seven hours; cold fit
and hot, with faint sweats after it.

_June_ 26.—Better; and having no victuals to eat, took my gun, but found
myself very weak.  However, I killed a she-goat, and with much difficulty
got it home, and broiled some of it, and ate, I would fain have stewed
it, and made some broth, but had no pot.

_June_ 27.—The ague again so violent that I lay a-bed all day, and
neither ate nor drank.  I was ready to perish for thirst; but so weak, I
had not strength to stand up, or to get myself any water to drink.
Prayed to God again, but was light-headed; and when I was not, I was so
ignorant that I knew not what to say; only I lay and cried, “Lord, look
upon me!  Lord, pity me!  Lord, have mercy upon me!”  I suppose I did
nothing else for two or three hours; till, the fit wearing off, I fell
asleep, and did not wake till far in the night.  When I awoke, I found
myself much refreshed, but weak, and exceeding thirsty.  However, as I
had no water in my habitation, I was forced to lie till morning, and went
to sleep again.  In this second sleep I had this terrible dream: I
thought that I was sitting on the ground, on the outside of my wall,
where I sat when the storm blew after the earthquake, and that I saw a
man descend from a great black cloud, in a bright flame of fire, and
light upon the ground.  He was all over as bright as a flame, so that I
could but just bear to look towards him; his countenance was most
inexpressibly dreadful, impossible for words to describe.  When he
stepped upon the ground with his feet, I thought the earth trembled, just
as it had done before in the earthquake, and all the air looked, to my
apprehension, as if it had been filled with flashes of fire.  He was no
sooner landed upon the earth, but he moved forward towards me, with a
long spear or weapon in his hand, to kill me; and when he came to a
rising ground, at some distance, he spoke to me—or I heard a voice so
terrible that it is impossible to express the terror of it.  All that I
can say I understood was this: “Seeing all these things have not brought
thee to repentance, now thou shalt die;” at which words, I thought he
lifted up the spear that was in his hand to kill me.

No one that shall ever read this account will expect that I should be
able to describe the horrors of my soul at this terrible vision.  I mean,
that even while it was a dream, I even dreamed of those horrors.  Nor is
it any more possible to describe the impression that remained upon my
mind when I awaked, and found it was but a dream.

I had, alas! no divine knowledge.  What I had received by the good
instruction of my father was then worn out by an uninterrupted series,
for eight years, of seafaring wickedness, and a constant conversation
with none but such as were, like myself, wicked and profane to the last
degree.  I do not remember that I had, in all that time, one thought that
so much as tended either to looking upwards towards God, or inwards
towards a reflection upon my own ways; but a certain stupidity of soul,
without desire of good, or conscience of evil, had entirely overwhelmed
me; and I was all that the most hardened, unthinking, wicked creature
among our common sailors can be supposed to be; not having the least
sense, either of the fear of God in danger, or of thankfulness to God in
deliverance.

In the relating what is already past of my story, this will be the more
easily believed when I shall add, that through all the variety of
miseries that had to this day befallen me, I never had so much as one
thought of it being the hand of God, or that it was a just punishment for
my sin—my rebellious behaviour against my father—or my present sins,
which were great—or so much as a punishment for the general course of my
wicked life.  When I was on the desperate expedition on the desert shores
of Africa, I never had so much as one thought of what would become of me,
or one wish to God to direct me whither I should go, or to keep me from
the danger which apparently surrounded me, as well from voracious
creatures as cruel savages.  But I was merely thoughtless of a God or a
Providence, acted like a mere brute, from the principles of nature, and
by the dictates of common sense only, and, indeed, hardly that.  When I
was delivered and taken up at sea by the Portugal captain, well used, and
dealt justly and honourably with, as well as charitably, I had not the
least thankfulness in my thoughts.  When, again, I was shipwrecked,
ruined, and in danger of drowning on this island, I was as far from
remorse, or looking on it as a judgment.  I only said to myself often,
that I was an unfortunate dog, and born to be always miserable.

It is true, when I got on shore first here, and found all my ship’s crew
drowned and myself spared, I was surprised with a kind of ecstasy, and
some transports of soul, which, had the grace of God assisted, might have
come up to true thankfulness; but it ended where it began, in a mere
common flight of joy, or, as I may say, being glad I was alive, without
the least reflection upon the distinguished goodness of the hand which
had preserved me, and had singled me out to be preserved when all the
rest were destroyed, or an inquiry why Providence had been thus merciful
unto me.  Even just the same common sort of joy which seamen generally
have, after they are got safe ashore from a shipwreck, which they drown
all in the next bowl of punch, and forget almost as soon as it is over;
and all the rest of my life was like it.  Even when I was afterwards, on
due consideration, made sensible of my condition, how I was cast on this
dreadful place, out of the reach of human kind, out of all hope of
relief, or prospect of redemption, as soon as I saw but a prospect of
living and that I should not starve and perish for hunger, all the sense
of my affliction wore off; and I began to be very easy, applied myself to
the works proper for my preservation and supply, and was far enough from
being afflicted at my condition, as a judgment from heaven, or as the
hand of God against me: these were thoughts which very seldom entered my
head.

The growing up of the corn, as is hinted in my Journal, had at first some
little influence upon me, and began to affect me with seriousness, as
long as I thought it had something miraculous in it; but as soon as ever
that part of the thought was removed, all the impression that was raised
from it wore off also, as I have noted already.  Even the earthquake,
though nothing could be more terrible in its nature, or more immediately
directing to the invisible Power which alone directs such things, yet no
sooner was the first fright over, but the impression it had made went off
also.  I had no more sense of God or His judgments—much less of the
present affliction of my circumstances being from His hand—than if I had
been in the most prosperous condition of life.  But now, when I began to
be sick, and a leisurely view of the miseries of death came to place
itself before me; when my spirits began to sink under the burden of a
strong distemper, and nature was exhausted with the violence of the
fever; conscience, that had slept so long, began to awake, and I began to
reproach myself with my past life, in which I had so evidently, by
uncommon wickedness, provoked the justice of God to lay me under uncommon
strokes, and to deal with me in so vindictive a manner.  These
reflections oppressed me for the second or third day of my distemper; and
in the violence, as well of the fever as of the dreadful reproaches of my
conscience, extorted some words from me like praying to God, though I
cannot say they were either a prayer attended with desires or with hopes:
it was rather the voice of mere fright and distress.  My thoughts were
confused, the convictions great upon my mind, and the horror of dying in
such a miserable condition raised vapours into my head with the mere
apprehensions; and in these hurries of my soul I knew not what my tongue
might express.  But it was rather exclamation, such as, “Lord, what a
miserable creature am I!  If I should be sick, I shall certainly die for
want of help; and what will become of me!”  Then the tears burst out of
my eyes, and I could say no more for a good while.  In this interval the
good advice of my father came to my mind, and presently his prediction,
which I mentioned at the beginning of this story—viz. that if I did take
this foolish step, God would not bless me, and I would have leisure
hereafter to reflect upon having neglected his counsel when there might
be none to assist in my recovery.  “Now,” said I, aloud, “my dear
father’s words are come to pass; God’s justice has overtaken me, and I
have none to help or hear me.  I rejected the voice of Providence, which
had mercifully put me in a posture or station of life wherein I might
have been happy and easy; but I would neither see it myself nor learn to
know the blessing of it from my parents.  I left them to mourn over my
folly, and now I am left to mourn under the consequences of it.  I abused
their help and assistance, who would have lifted me in the world, and
would have made everything easy to me; and now I have difficulties to
struggle with, too great for even nature itself to support, and no
assistance, no help, no comfort, no advice.”  Then I cried out, “Lord, be
my help, for I am in great distress.”  This was the first prayer, if I
may call it so, that I had made for many years.

But to return to my Journal.

_June_ 28.—Having been somewhat refreshed with the sleep I had had, and
the fit being entirely off, I got up; and though the fright and terror of
my dream was very great, yet I considered that the fit of the ague would
return again the next day, and now was my time to get something to
refresh and support myself when I should be ill; and the first thing I
did, I filled a large square case-bottle with water, and set it upon my
table, in reach of my bed; and to take off the chill or aguish
disposition of the water, I put about a quarter of a pint of rum into it,
and mixed them together.  Then I got me a piece of the goat’s flesh and
broiled it on the coals, but could eat very little.  I walked about, but
was very weak, and withal very sad and heavy-hearted under a sense of my
miserable condition, dreading, the return of my distemper the next day.
At night I made my supper of three of the turtle’s eggs, which I roasted
in the ashes, and ate, as we call it, in the shell, and this was the
first bit of meat I had ever asked God’s blessing to, that I could
remember, in my whole life.  After I had eaten I tried to walk, but found
myself so weak that I could hardly carry a gun, for I never went out
without that; so I went but a little way, and sat down upon the ground,
looking out upon the sea, which was just before me, and very calm and
smooth.  As I sat here some such thoughts as these occurred to me: What
is this earth and sea, of which I have seen so much?  Whence is it
produced?  And what am I, and all the other creatures wild and tame,
human and brutal?  Whence are we?  Sure we are all made by some secret
Power, who formed the earth and sea, the air and sky.  And who is that?
Then it followed most naturally, it is God that has made all.  Well, but
then it came on strangely, if God has made all these things, He guides
and governs them all, and all things that concern them; for the Power
that could make all things must certainly have power to guide and direct
them.  If so, nothing can happen in the great circuit of His works,
either without His knowledge or appointment.

And if nothing happens without His knowledge, He knows that I am here,
and am in this dreadful condition; and if nothing happens without His
appointment, He has appointed all this to befall me.  Nothing occurred to
my thought to contradict any of these conclusions, and therefore it
rested upon me with the greater force, that it must needs be that God had
appointed all this to befall me; that I was brought into this miserable
circumstance by His direction, He having the sole power, not of me only,
but of everything that happened in the world.  Immediately it followed:
Why has God done this to me?  What have I done to be thus used?  My
conscience presently checked me in that inquiry, as if I had blasphemed,
and methought it spoke to me like a voice: “Wretch! dost _thou_ ask what
thou hast done?  Look back upon a dreadful misspent life, and ask thyself
what thou hast _not_ done?  Ask, why is it that thou wert not long ago
destroyed?  Why wert thou not drowned in Yarmouth Roads; killed in the
fight when the ship was taken by the Sallee man-of-war; devoured by the
wild beasts on the coast of Africa; or drowned _here_, when all the crew
perished but thyself?  Dost _thou_ ask, what have I done?”  I was struck
dumb with these reflections, as one astonished, and had not a word to
say—no, not to answer to myself, but rose up pensive and sad, walked back
to my retreat, and went up over my wall, as if I had been going to bed;
but my thoughts were sadly disturbed, and I had no inclination to sleep;
so I sat down in my chair, and lighted my lamp, for it began to be dark.
Now, as the apprehension of the return of my distemper terrified me very
much, it occurred to my thought that the Brazilians take no physic but
their tobacco for almost all distempers, and I had a piece of a roll of
tobacco in one of the chests, which was quite cured, and some also that
was green, and not quite cured.

I went, directed by Heaven no doubt; for in this chest I found a cure
both for soul and body.  I opened the chest, and found what I looked for,
the tobacco; and as the few books I had saved lay there too, I took out
one of the Bibles which I mentioned before, and which to this time I had
not found leisure or inclination to look into.  I say, I took it out, and
brought both that and the tobacco with me to the table.  What use to make
of the tobacco I knew not, in my distemper, or whether it was good for it
or no: but I tried several experiments with it, as if I was resolved it
should hit one way or other.  I first took a piece of leaf, and chewed it
in my mouth, which, indeed, at first almost stupefied my brain, the
tobacco being green and strong, and that I had not been much used to.
Then I took some and steeped it an hour or two in some rum, and resolved
to take a dose of it when I lay down; and lastly, I burnt some upon a pan
of coals, and held my nose close over the smoke of it as long as I could
bear it, as well for the heat as almost for suffocation.  In the interval
of this operation I took up the Bible and began to read; but my head was
too much disturbed with the tobacco to bear reading, at least at that
time; only, having opened the book casually, the first words that
occurred to me were these, “Call on Me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.”  These words were very apt to
my case, and made some impression upon my thoughts at the time of reading
them, though not so much as they did afterwards; for, as for being
_delivered_, the word had no sound, as I may say, to me; the thing was so
remote, so impossible in my apprehension of things, that I began to say,
as the children of Israel did when they were promised flesh to eat, “Can
God spread a table in the wilderness?” so I began to say, “Can God
Himself deliver me from this place?”  And as it was not for many years
that any hopes appeared, this prevailed very often upon my thoughts; but,
however, the words made a great impression upon me, and I mused upon them
very often.  It grew now late, and the tobacco had, as I said, dozed my
head so much that I inclined to sleep; so I left my lamp burning in the
cave, lest I should want anything in the night, and went to bed.  But
before I lay down, I did what I never had done in all my life—I kneeled
down, and prayed to God to fulfil the promise to me, that if I called
upon Him in the day of trouble, He would deliver me.  After my broken and
imperfect prayer was over, I drank the rum in which I had steeped the
tobacco, which was so strong and rank of the tobacco that I could
scarcely get it down; immediately upon this I went to bed.  I found
presently it flew up into my head violently; but I fell into a sound
sleep, and waked no more till, by the sun, it must necessarily be near
three o’clock in the afternoon the next day—nay, to this hour I am partly
of opinion that I slept all the next day and night, and till almost three
the day after; for otherwise I know not how I should lose a day out of my
reckoning in the days of the week, as it appeared some years after I had
done; for if I had lost it by crossing and recrossing the line, I should
have lost more than one day; but certainly I lost a day in my account,
and never knew which way.  Be that, however, one way or the other, when I
awaked I found myself exceedingly refreshed, and my spirits lively and
cheerful; when I got up I was stronger than I was the day before, and my
stomach better, for I was hungry; and, in short, I had no fit the next
day, but continued much altered for the better.  This was the 29th.

The 30th was my well day, of course, and I went abroad with my gun, but
did not care to travel too far.  I killed a sea-fowl or two, something
like a brandgoose, and brought them home, but was not very forward to eat
them; so I ate some more of the turtle’s eggs, which were very good.
This evening I renewed the medicine, which I had supposed did me good the
day before—the tobacco steeped in rum; only I did not take so much as
before, nor did I chew any of the leaf, or hold my head over the smoke;
however, I was not so well the next day, which was the first of July, as
I hoped I should have been; for I had a little spice of the cold fit, but
it was not much.

_July_ 2.—I renewed the medicine all the three ways; and dosed myself
with it as at first, and doubled the quantity which I drank.

_July_ 3.—I missed the fit for good and all, though I did not recover my
full strength for some weeks after.  While I was thus gathering strength,
my thoughts ran exceedingly upon this Scripture, “I will deliver thee”;
and the impossibility of my deliverance lay much upon my mind, in bar of
my ever expecting it; but as I was discouraging myself with such
thoughts, it occurred to my mind that I pored so much upon my deliverance
from the main affliction, that I disregarded the deliverance I had
received, and I was as it were made to ask myself such questions as
these—viz. Have I not been delivered, and wonderfully too, from
sickness—from the most distressed condition that could be, and that was
so frightful to me? and what notice had I taken of it?  Had I done my
part?  God had delivered me, but I had not glorified Him—that is to say,
I had not owned and been thankful for that as a deliverance; and how
could I expect greater deliverance?  This touched my heart very much; and
immediately I knelt down and gave God thanks aloud for my recovery from
my sickness.

_July_ 4.—In the morning I took the Bible; and beginning at the New
Testament, I began seriously to read it, and imposed upon myself to read
a while every morning and every night; not tying myself to the number of
chapters, but long as my thoughts should engage me.  It was not long
after I set seriously to this work till I found my heart more deeply and
sincerely affected with the wickedness of my past life.  The impression
of my dream revived; and the words, “All these things have not brought
thee to repentance,” ran seriously through my thoughts.  I was earnestly
begging of God to give me repentance, when it happened providentially,
the very day, that, reading the Scripture, I came to these words: “He is
exalted a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance and to give
remission.”  I threw down the book; and with my heart as well as my hands
lifted up to heaven, in a kind of ecstasy of joy, I cried out aloud,
“Jesus, thou son of David!  Jesus, thou exalted Prince and Saviour! give
me repentance!”  This was the first time I could say, in the true sense
of the words, that I prayed in all my life; for now I prayed with a sense
of my condition, and a true Scripture view of hope, founded on the
encouragement of the Word of God; and from this time, I may say, I began
to hope that God would hear me.

Now I began to construe the words mentioned above, “Call on Me, and I
will deliver thee,” in a different sense from what I had ever done
before; for then I had no notion of anything being called _deliverance_,
but my being delivered from the captivity I was in; for though I was
indeed at large in the place, yet the island was certainly a prison to
me, and that in the worse sense in the world.  But now I learned to take
it in another sense: now I looked back upon my past life with such
horror, and my sins appeared so dreadful, that my soul sought nothing of
God but deliverance from the load of guilt that bore down all my comfort.
As for my solitary life, it was nothing.  I did not so much as pray to be
delivered from it or think of it; it was all of no consideration in
comparison to this.  And I add this part here, to hint to whoever shall
read it, that whenever they come to a true sense of things, they will
find deliverance from sin a much greater blessing than deliverance from
affliction.

But, leaving this part, I return to my Journal.

My condition began now to be, though not less miserable as to my way of
living, yet much easier to my mind: and my thoughts being directed, by a
constant reading the Scripture and praying to God, to things of a higher
nature, I had a great deal of comfort within, which till now I knew
nothing of; also, my health and strength returned, I bestirred myself to
furnish myself with everything that I wanted, and make my way of living
as regular as I could.

From the 4th of July to the 14th I was chiefly employed in walking about
with my gun in my hand, a little and a little at a time, as a man that
was gathering up his strength after a fit of sickness; for it is hardly
to be imagined how low I was, and to what weakness I was reduced.  The
application which I made use of was perfectly new, and perhaps which had
never cured an ague before; neither can I recommend it to any to
practise, by this experiment: and though it did carry off the fit, yet it
rather contributed to weakening me; for I had frequent convulsions in my
nerves and limbs for some time.  I learned from it also this, in
particular, that being abroad in the rainy season was the most pernicious
thing to my health that could be, especially in those rains which came
attended with storms and hurricanes of wind; for as the rain which came
in the dry season was almost always accompanied with such storms, so I
found that rain was much more dangerous than the rain which fell in
September and October.




CHAPTER VII—AGRICULTURAL EXPERIENCE


I had now been in this unhappy island above ten months.  All possibility
of deliverance from this condition seemed to be entirely taken from me;
and I firmly believe that no human shape had ever set foot upon that
place.  Having now secured my habitation, as I thought, fully to my mind,
I had a great desire to make a more perfect discovery of the island, and
to see what other productions I might find, which I yet knew nothing of.

It was on the 15th of July that I began to take a more particular survey
of the island itself.  I went up the creek first, where, as I hinted, I
brought my rafts on shore.  I found after I came about two miles up, that
the tide did not flow any higher, and that it was no more than a little
brook of running water, very fresh and good; but this being the dry
season, there was hardly any water in some parts of it—at least not
enough to run in any stream, so as it could be perceived.  On the banks
of this brook I found many pleasant savannahs or meadows, plain, smooth,
and covered with grass; and on the rising parts of them, next to the
higher grounds, where the water, as might be supposed, never overflowed,
I found a great deal of tobacco, green, and growing to a great and very
strong stalk.  There were divers other plants, which I had no notion of
or understanding about, that might, perhaps, have virtues of their own,
which I could not find out.  I searched for the cassava root, which the
Indians, in all that climate, make their bread of, but I could find none.
I saw large plants of aloes, but did not understand them.  I saw several
sugar-canes, but wild, and, for want of cultivation, imperfect.  I
contented myself with these discoveries for this time, and came back,
musing with myself what course I might take to know the virtue and
goodness of any of the fruits or plants which I should discover, but
could bring it to no conclusion; for, in short, I had made so little
observation while I was in the Brazils, that I knew little of the plants
in the field; at least, very little that might serve to any purpose now
in my distress.

The next day, the sixteenth, I went up the same way again; and after
going something further than I had gone the day before, I found the brook
and the savannahs cease, and the country become more woody than before.
In this part I found different fruits, and particularly I found melons
upon the ground, in great abundance, and grapes upon the trees.  The
vines had spread, indeed, over the trees, and the clusters of grapes were
just now in their prime, very ripe and rich.  This was a surprising
discovery, and I was exceeding glad of them; but I was warned by my
experience to eat sparingly of them; remembering that when I was ashore
in Barbary, the eating of grapes killed several of our Englishmen, who
were slaves there, by throwing them into fluxes and fevers.  But I found
an excellent use for these grapes; and that was, to cure or dry them in
the sun, and keep them as dried grapes or raisins are kept, which I
thought would be, as indeed they were, wholesome and agreeable to eat
when no grapes could be had.

I spent all that evening there, and went not back to my habitation;
which, by the way, was the first night, as I might say, I had lain from
home.  In the night, I took my first contrivance, and got up in a tree,
where I slept well; and the next morning proceeded upon my discovery;
travelling nearly four miles, as I might judge by the length of the
valley, keeping still due north, with a ridge of hills on the south and
north side of me.  At the end of this march I came to an opening where
the country seemed to descend to the west; and a little spring of fresh
water, which issued out of the side of the hill by me, ran the other way,
that is, due east; and the country appeared so fresh, so green, so
flourishing, everything being in a constant verdure or flourish of spring
that it looked like a planted garden.  I descended a little on the side
of that delicious vale, surveying it with a secret kind of pleasure,
though mixed with my other afflicting thoughts, to think that this was
all my own; that I was king and lord of all this country indefensibly,
and had a right of possession; and if I could convey it, I might have it
in inheritance as completely as any lord of a manor in England.  I saw
here abundance of cocoa trees, orange, and lemon, and citron trees; but
all wild, and very few bearing any fruit, at least not then.  However,
the green limes that I gathered were not only pleasant to eat, but very
wholesome; and I mixed their juice afterwards with water, which made it
very wholesome, and very cool and refreshing.  I found now I had business
enough to gather and carry home; and I resolved to lay up a store as well
of grapes as limes and lemons, to furnish myself for the wet season,
which I knew was approaching.  In order to do this, I gathered a great
heap of grapes in one place, a lesser heap in another place, and a great
parcel of limes and lemons in another place; and taking a few of each
with me, I travelled homewards; resolving to come again, and bring a bag
or sack, or what I could make, to carry the rest home.  Accordingly,
having spent three days in this journey, I came home (so I must now call
my tent and my cave); but before I got thither the grapes were spoiled;
the richness of the fruit and the weight of the juice having broken them
and bruised them, they were good for little or nothing; as to the limes,
they were good, but I could bring but a few.

The next day, being the nineteenth, I went back, having made me two small
bags to bring home my harvest; but I was surprised, when coming to my
heap of grapes, which were so rich and fine when I gathered them, to find
them all spread about, trod to pieces, and dragged about, some here, some
there, and abundance eaten and devoured.  By this I concluded there were
some wild creatures thereabouts, which had done this; but what they were
I knew not.  However, as I found there was no laying them up on heaps,
and no carrying them away in a sack, but that one way they would be
destroyed, and the other way they would be crushed with their own weight,
I took another course; for I gathered a large quantity of the grapes, and
hung upon the out-branches of the trees, that they might cure and dry in
the sun; and as for the limes and lemons, I carried as many back as I
could well stand under.

When I came home from this journey, I contemplated with great pleasure
the fruitfulness of that valley, and the pleasantness of the situation;
the security from storms on that side of the water, and the wood: and
concluded that I had pitched upon a place to fix my abode which was by
far the worst part of the country.  Upon the whole, I began to consider
of removing my habitation, and looking out for a place equally safe as
where now I was situate, if possible, in that pleasant, fruitful part of
the island.

This thought ran long in my head, and I was exceeding fond of it for some
time, the pleasantness of the place tempting me; but when I came to a
nearer view of it, I considered that I was now by the seaside, where it
was at least possible that something might happen to my advantage, and,
by the same ill fate that brought me hither might bring some other
unhappy wretches to the same place; and though it was scarce probable
that any such thing should ever happen, yet to enclose myself among the
hills and woods in the centre of the island was to anticipate my bondage,
and to render such an affair not only improbable, but impossible; and
that therefore I ought not by any means to remove.  However, I was so
enamoured of this place, that I spent much of my time there for the whole
of the remaining part of the month of July; and though upon second
thoughts, I resolved not to remove, yet I built me a little kind of a
bower, and surrounded it at a distance with a strong fence, being a
double hedge, as high as I could reach, well staked and filled between
with brushwood; and here I lay very secure, sometimes two or three nights
together; always going over it with a ladder; so that I fancied now I had
my country house and my sea-coast house; and this work took me up to the
beginning of August.

I had but newly finished my fence, and began to enjoy my labour, when the
rains came on, and made me stick close to my first habitation; for though
I had made me a tent like the other, with a piece of a sail, and spread
it very well, yet I had not the shelter of a hill to keep me from storms,
nor a cave behind me to retreat into when the rains were extraordinary.

About the beginning of August, as I said, I had finished my bower, and
began to enjoy myself.  The 3rd of August, I found the grapes I had hung
up perfectly dried, and, indeed, were excellent good raisins of the sun;
so I began to take them down from the trees, and it was very happy that I
did so, for the rains which followed would have spoiled them, and I had
lost the best part of my winter food; for I had above two hundred large
bunches of them.  No sooner had I taken them all down, and carried the
most of them home to my cave, than it began to rain; and from hence,
which was the 14th of August, it rained, more or less, every day till the
middle of October; and sometimes so violently, that I could not stir out
of my cave for several days.

In this season I was much surprised with the increase of my family; I had
been concerned for the loss of one of my cats, who ran away from me, or,
as I thought, had been dead, and I heard no more tidings of her till, to
my astonishment, she came home about the end of August with three
kittens.  This was the more strange to me because, though I had killed a
wild cat, as I called it, with my gun, yet I thought it was quite a
different kind from our European cats; but the young cats were the same
kind of house-breed as the old one; and both my cats being females, I
thought it very strange.  But from these three cats I afterwards came to
be so pestered with cats that I was forced to kill them like vermin or
wild beasts, and to drive them from my house as much as possible.

From the 14th of August to the 26th, incessant rain, so that I could not
stir, and was now very careful not to be much wet.  In this confinement,
I began to be straitened for food: but venturing out twice, I one day
killed a goat; and the last day, which was the 26th, found a very large
tortoise, which was a treat to me, and my food was regulated thus: I ate
a bunch of raisins for my breakfast; a piece of the goat’s flesh, or of
the turtle, for my dinner, broiled—for, to my great misfortune, I had no
vessel to boil or stew anything; and two or three of the turtle’s eggs
for my supper.

During this confinement in my cover by the rain, I worked daily two or
three hours at enlarging my cave, and by degrees worked it on towards one
side, till I came to the outside of the hill, and made a door or way out,
which came beyond my fence or wall; and so I came in and out this way.
But I was not perfectly easy at lying so open; for, as I had managed
myself before, I was in a perfect enclosure; whereas now I thought I lay
exposed, and open for anything to come in upon me; and yet I could not
perceive that there was any living thing to fear, the biggest creature
that I had yet seen upon the island being a goat.

_Sept._ 30.—I was now come to the unhappy anniversary of my landing.  I
cast up the notches on my post, and found I had been on shore three
hundred and sixty-five days.  I kept this day as a solemn fast, setting
it apart for religious exercise, prostrating myself on the ground with
the most serious humiliation, confessing my sins to God, acknowledging
His righteous judgments upon me, and praying to Him to have mercy on me
through Jesus Christ; and not having tasted the least refreshment for
twelve hours, even till the going down of the sun, I then ate a
biscuit-cake and a bunch of grapes, and went to bed, finishing the day as
I began it.  I had all this time observed no Sabbath day; for as at first
I had no sense of religion upon my mind, I had, after some time, omitted
to distinguish the weeks, by making a longer notch than ordinary for the
Sabbath day, and so did not really know what any of the days were; but
now, having cast up the days as above, I found I had been there a year;
so I divided it into weeks, and set apart every seventh day for a
Sabbath; though I found at the end of my account I had lost a day or two
in my reckoning.  A little after this, my ink began to fail me, and so I
contented myself to use it more sparingly, and to write down only the
most remarkable events of my life, without continuing a daily memorandum
of other things.

The rainy season and the dry season began now to appear regular to me,
and I learned to divide them so as to provide for them accordingly; but I
bought all my experience before I had it, and this I am going to relate
was one of the most discouraging experiments that I made.

I have mentioned that I had saved the few ears of barley and rice, which
I had so surprisingly found spring up, as I thought, of themselves, and I
believe there were about thirty stalks of rice, and about twenty of
barley; and now I thought it a proper time to sow it, after the rains,
the sun being in its southern position, going from me.  Accordingly, I
dug up a piece of ground as well as I could with my wooden spade, and
dividing it into two parts, I sowed my grain; but as I was sowing, it
casually occurred to my thoughts that I would not sow it all at first,
because I did not know when was the proper time for it, so I sowed about
two-thirds of the seed, leaving about a handful of each.  It was a great
comfort to me afterwards that I did so, for not one grain of what I sowed
this time came to anything: for the dry months following, the earth
having had no rain after the seed was sown, it had no moisture to assist
its growth, and never came up at all till the wet season had come again,
and then it grew as if it had been but newly sown.  Finding my first seed
did not grow, which I easily imagined was by the drought, I sought for a
moister piece of ground to make another trial in, and I dug up a piece of
ground near my new bower, and sowed the rest of my seed in February, a
little before the vernal equinox; and this having the rainy months of
March and April to water it, sprung up very pleasantly, and yielded a
very good crop; but having part of the seed left only, and not daring to
sow all that I had, I had but a small quantity at last, my whole crop not
amounting to above half a peck of each kind.  But by this experiment I
was made master of my business, and knew exactly when the proper season
was to sow, and that I might expect two seed-times and two harvests every
year.

While this corn was growing I made a little discovery, which was of use
to me afterwards.  As soon as the rains were over, and the weather began
to settle, which was about the month of November, I made a visit up the
country to my bower, where, though I had not been some months, yet I
found all things just as I left them.  The circle or double hedge that I
had made was not only firm and entire, but the stakes which I had cut out
of some trees that grew thereabouts were all shot out and grown with long
branches, as much as a willow-tree usually shoots the first year after
lopping its head.  I could not tell what tree to call it that these
stakes were cut from.  I was surprised, and yet very well pleased, to see
the young trees grow; and I pruned them, and led them up to grow as much
alike as I could; and it is scarce credible how beautiful a figure they
grew into in three years; so that though the hedge made a circle of about
twenty-five yards in diameter, yet the trees, for such I might now call
them, soon covered it, and it was a complete shade, sufficient to lodge
under all the dry season.  This made me resolve to cut some more stakes,
and make me a hedge like this, in a semi-circle round my wall (I mean
that of my first dwelling), which I did; and placing the trees or stakes
in a double row, at about eight yards distance from my first fence, they
grew presently, and were at first a fine cover to my habitation, and
afterwards served for a defence also, as I shall observe in its order.

I found now that the seasons of the year might generally be divided, not
into summer and winter, as in Europe, but into the rainy seasons and the
dry seasons, which were generally thus:—The half of February, the whole
of March, and the half of April—rainy, the sun being then on or near the
equinox.

The half of April, the whole of May, June, and July, and the half of
August—dry, the sun being then to the north of the line.

The half of August, the whole of September, and the half of
October—rainy, the sun being then come back.

The half of October, the whole of November, December, and January, and
the half of February—dry, the sun being then to the south of the line.

The rainy seasons sometimes held longer or shorter as the winds happened
to blow, but this was the general observation I made.  After I had found
by experience the ill consequences of being abroad in the rain, I took
care to furnish myself with provisions beforehand, that I might not be
obliged to go out, and I sat within doors as much as possible during the
wet months.  This time I found much employment, and very suitable also to
the time, for I found great occasion for many things which I had no way
to furnish myself with but by hard labour and constant application;
particularly I tried many ways to make myself a basket, but all the twigs
I could get for the purpose proved so brittle that they would do nothing.
It proved of excellent advantage to me now, that when I was a boy, I used
to take great delight in standing at a basket-maker’s, in the town where
my father lived, to see them make their wicker-ware; and being, as boys
usually are, very officious to help, and a great observer of the manner
in which they worked those things, and sometimes lending a hand, I had by
these means full knowledge of the methods of it, and I wanted nothing but
the materials, when it came into my mind that the twigs of that tree from
whence I cut my stakes that grew might possibly be as tough as the
sallows, willows, and osiers in England, and I resolved to try.
Accordingly, the next day I went to my country house, as I called it, and
cutting some of the smaller twigs, I found them to my purpose as much as
I could desire; whereupon I came the next time prepared with a hatchet to
cut down a quantity, which I soon found, for there was great plenty of
them.  These I set up to dry within my circle or hedge, and when they
were fit for use I carried them to my cave; and here, during the next
season, I employed myself in making, as well as I could, a great many
baskets, both to carry earth or to carry or lay up anything, as I had
occasion; and though I did not finish them very handsomely, yet I made
them sufficiently serviceable for my purpose; thus, afterwards, I took
care never to be without them; and as my wicker-ware decayed, I made
more, especially strong, deep baskets to place my corn in, instead of
sacks, when I should come to have any quantity of it.

Having mastered this difficulty, and employed a world of time about it, I
bestirred myself to see, if possible, how to supply two wants.  I had no
vessels to hold anything that was liquid, except two runlets, which were
almost full of rum, and some glass bottles—some of the common size, and
others which were case bottles, square, for the holding of water,
spirits, &c.  I had not so much as a pot to boil anything, except a great
kettle, which I saved out of the ship, and which was too big for such as
I desired it—viz. to make broth, and stew a bit of meat by itself.  The
second thing I fain would have had was a tobacco-pipe, but it was
impossible to me to make one; however, I found a contrivance for that,
too, at last.  I employed myself in planting my second rows of stakes or
piles, and in this wicker-working all the summer or dry season, when
another business took me up more time than it could be imagined I could
spare.




CHAPTER VIII—SURVEYS HIS POSITION


I mentioned before that I had a great mind to see the whole island, and
that I had travelled up the brook, and so on to where I built my bower,
and where I had an opening quite to the sea, on the other side of the
island.  I now resolved to travel quite across to the sea-shore on that
side; so, taking my gun, a hatchet, and my dog, and a larger quantity of
powder and shot than usual, with two biscuit-cakes and a great bunch of
raisins in my pouch for my store, I began my journey.  When I had passed
the vale where my bower stood, as above, I came within view of the sea to
the west, and it being a very clear day, I fairly descried land—whether
an island or a continent I could not tell; but it lay very high,
extending from the W. to the W.S.W. at a very great distance; by my guess
it could not be less than fifteen or twenty leagues off.

I could not tell what part of the world this might be, otherwise than
that I knew it must be part of America, and, as I concluded by all my
observations, must be near the Spanish dominions, and perhaps was all
inhabited by savages, where, if I had landed, I had been in a worse
condition than I was now; and therefore I acquiesced in the dispositions
of Providence, which I began now to own and to believe ordered everything
for the best; I say I quieted my mind with this, and left off afflicting
myself with fruitless wishes of being there.

Besides, after some thought upon this affair, I considered that if this
land was the Spanish coast, I should certainly, one time or other, see
some vessel pass or repass one way or other; but if not, then it was the
savage coast between the Spanish country and Brazils, where are found the
worst of savages; for they are cannibals or men-eaters, and fail not to
murder and devour all the human bodies that fall into their hands.

With these considerations, I walked very leisurely forward.  I found that
side of the island where I now was much pleasanter than mine—the open or
savannah fields sweet, adorned with flowers and grass, and full of very
fine woods.  I saw abundance of parrots, and fain I would have caught
one, if possible, to have kept it to be tame, and taught it to speak to
me.  I did, after some painstaking, catch a young parrot, for I knocked
it down with a stick, and having recovered it, I brought it home; but it
was some years before I could make him speak; however, at last I taught
him to call me by name very familiarly.  But the accident that followed,
though it be a trifle, will be very diverting in its place.

I was exceedingly diverted with this journey.  I found in the low grounds
hares (as I thought them to be) and foxes; but they differed greatly from
all the other kinds I had met with, nor could I satisfy myself to eat
them, though I killed several.  But I had no need to be venturous, for I
had no want of food, and of that which was very good too, especially
these three sorts, viz. goats, pigeons, and turtle, or tortoise, which
added to my grapes, Leadenhall market could not have furnished a table
better than I, in proportion to the company; and though my case was
deplorable enough, yet I had great cause for thankfulness that I was not
driven to any extremities for food, but had rather plenty, even to
dainties.

I never travelled in this journey above two miles outright in a day, or
thereabouts; but I took so many turns and re-turns to see what
discoveries I could make, that I came weary enough to the place where I
resolved to sit down all night; and then I either reposed myself in a
tree, or surrounded myself with a row of stakes set upright in the
ground, either from one tree to another, or so as no wild creature could
come at me without waking me.

As soon as I came to the sea-shore, I was surprised to see that I had
taken up my lot on the worst side of the island, for here, indeed, the
shore was covered with innumerable turtles, whereas on the other side I
had found but three in a year and a half.  Here was also an infinite
number of fowls of many kinds, some which I had seen, and some which I
had not seen before, and many of them very good meat, but such as I knew
not the names of, except those called penguins.

I could have shot as many as I pleased, but was very sparing of my powder
and shot, and therefore had more mind to kill a she-goat if I could,
which I could better feed on; and though there were many goats here, more
than on my side the island, yet it was with much more difficulty that I
could come near them, the country being flat and even, and they saw me
much sooner than when I was on the hills.

I confess this side of the country was much pleasanter than mine; but yet
I had not the least inclination to remove, for as I was fixed in my
habitation it became natural to me, and I seemed all the while I was here
to be as it were upon a journey, and from home.  However, I travelled
along the shore of the sea towards the east, I suppose about twelve
miles, and then setting up a great pole upon the shore for a mark, I
concluded I would go home again, and that the next journey I took should
be on the other side of the island east from my dwelling, and so round
till I came to my post again.

I took another way to come back than that I went, thinking I could easily
keep all the island so much in my view that I could not miss finding my
first dwelling by viewing the country; but I found myself mistaken, for
being come about two or three miles, I found myself descended into a very
large valley, but so surrounded with hills, and those hills covered with
wood, that I could not see which was my way by any direction but that of
the sun, nor even then, unless I knew very well the position of the sun
at that time of the day.  It happened, to my further misfortune, that the
weather proved hazy for three or four days while I was in the valley, and
not being able to see the sun, I wandered about very uncomfortably, and
at last was obliged to find the seaside, look for my post, and come back
the same way I went: and then, by easy journeys, I turned homeward, the
weather being exceeding hot, and my gun, ammunition, hatchet, and other
things very heavy.

In this journey my dog surprised a young kid, and seized upon it; and I,
running in to take hold of it, caught it, and saved it alive from the
dog.  I had a great mind to bring it home if I could, for I had often
been musing whether it might not be possible to get a kid or two, and so
raise a breed of tame goats, which might supply me when my powder and
shot should be all spent.  I made a collar for this little creature, and
with a string, which I made of some rope-yam, which I always carried
about me, I led him along, though with some difficulty, till I came to my
bower, and there I enclosed him and left him, for I was very impatient to
be at home, from whence I had been absent above a month.

I cannot express what a satisfaction it was to me to come into my old
hutch, and lie down in my hammock-bed.  This little wandering journey,
without settled place of abode, had been so unpleasant to me, that my own
house, as I called it to myself, was a perfect settlement to me compared
to that; and it rendered everything about me so comfortable, that I
resolved I would never go a great way from it again while it should be my
lot to stay on the island.

I reposed myself here a week, to rest and regale myself after my long
journey; during which most of the time was taken up in the weighty affair
of making a cage for my Poll, who began now to be a mere domestic, and to
be well acquainted with me.  Then I began to think of the poor kid which
I had penned in within my little circle, and resolved to go and fetch it
home, or give it some food; accordingly I went, and found it where I left
it, for indeed it could not get out, but was almost starved for want of
food.  I went and cut boughs of trees, and branches of such shrubs as I
could find, and threw it over, and having fed it, I tied it as I did
before, to lead it away; but it was so tame with being hungry, that I had
no need to have tied it, for it followed me like a dog: and as I
continually fed it, the creature became so loving, so gentle, and so
fond, that it became from that time one of my domestics also, and would
never leave me afterwards.

The rainy season of the autumnal equinox was now come, and I kept the
30th of September in the same solemn manner as before, being the
anniversary of my landing on the island, having now been there two years,
and no more prospect of being delivered than the first day I came there,
I spent the whole day in humble and thankful acknowledgments of the many
wonderful mercies which my solitary condition was attended with, and
without which it might have been infinitely more miserable.  I gave
humble and hearty thanks that God had been pleased to discover to me that
it was possible I might be more happy in this solitary condition than I
should have been in the liberty of society, and in all the pleasures of
the world; that He could fully make up to me the deficiencies of my
solitary state, and the want of human society, by His presence and the
communications of His grace to my soul; supporting, comforting, and
encouraging me to depend upon His providence here, and hope for His
eternal presence hereafter.

It was now that I began sensibly to feel how much more happy this life I
now led was, with all its miserable circumstances, than the wicked,
cursed, abominable life I led all the past part of my days; and now I
changed both my sorrows and my joys; my very desires altered, my
affections changed their gusts, and my delights were perfectly new from
what they were at my first coming, or, indeed, for the two years past.

Before, as I walked about, either on my hunting or for viewing the
country, the anguish of my soul at my condition would break out upon me
on a sudden, and my very heart would die within me, to think of the
woods, the mountains, the deserts I was in, and how I was a prisoner,
locked up with the eternal bars and bolts of the ocean, in an uninhabited
wilderness, without redemption.  In the midst of the greatest composure
of my mind, this would break out upon me like a storm, and make me wring
my hands and weep like a child.  Sometimes it would take me in the middle
of my work, and I would immediately sit down and sigh, and look upon the
ground for an hour or two together; and this was still worse to me, for
if I could burst out into tears, or vent myself by words, it would go
off, and the grief, having exhausted itself, would abate.

But now I began to exercise myself with new thoughts: I daily read the
word of God, and applied all the comforts of it to my present state.  One
morning, being very sad, I opened the Bible upon these words, “I will
never, never leave thee, nor forsake thee.”  Immediately it occurred that
these words were to me; why else should they be directed in such a
manner, just at the moment when I was mourning over my condition, as one
forsaken of God and man?  “Well, then,” said I, “if God does not forsake
me, of what ill consequence can it be, or what matters it, though the
world should all forsake me, seeing on the other hand, if I had all the
world, and should lose the favour and blessing of God, there would be no
comparison in the loss?”

From this moment I began to conclude in my mind that it was possible for
me to be more happy in this forsaken, solitary condition than it was
probable I should ever have been in any other particular state in the
world; and with this thought I was going to give thanks to God for
bringing me to this place.  I know not what it was, but something shocked
my mind at that thought, and I durst not speak the words.  “How canst
thou become such a hypocrite,” said I, even audibly, “to pretend to be
thankful for a condition which, however thou mayest endeavour to be
contented with, thou wouldst rather pray heartily to be delivered from?”
So I stopped there; but though I could not say I thanked God for being
there, yet I sincerely gave thanks to God for opening my eyes, by
whatever afflicting providences, to see the former condition of my life,
and to mourn for my wickedness, and repent.  I never opened the Bible, or
shut it, but my very soul within me blessed God for directing my friend
in England, without any order of mine, to pack it up among my goods, and
for assisting me afterwards to save it out of the wreck of the ship.

Thus, and in this disposition of mind, I began my third year; and though
I have not given the reader the trouble of so particular an account of my
works this year as the first, yet in general it may be observed that I
was very seldom idle, but having regularly divided my time according to
the several daily employments that were before me, such as: first, my
duty to God, and the reading the Scriptures, which I constantly set apart
some time for thrice every day; secondly, the going abroad with my gun
for food, which generally took me up three hours in every morning, when
it did not rain; thirdly, the ordering, cutting, preserving, and cooking
what I had killed or caught for my supply; these took up great part of
the day.  Also, it is to be considered, that in the middle of the day,
when the sun was in the zenith, the violence of the heat was too great to
stir out; so that about four hours in the evening was all the time I
could be supposed to work in, with this exception, that sometimes I
changed my hours of hunting and working, and went to work in the morning,
and abroad with my gun in the afternoon.

To this short time allowed for labour I desire may be added the exceeding
laboriousness of my work; the many hours which, for want of tools, want
of help, and want of skill, everything I did took up out of my time.  For
example, I was full two and forty days in making a board for a long
shelf, which I wanted in my cave; whereas, two sawyers, with their tools
and a saw-pit, would have cut six of them out of the same tree in half a
day.

My case was this: it was to be a large tree which was to be cut down,
because my board was to be a broad one.  This tree I was three days in
cutting down, and two more cutting off the boughs, and reducing it to a
log or piece of timber.  With inexpressible hacking and hewing I reduced
both the sides of it into chips till it began to be light enough to move;
then I turned it, and made one side of it smooth and flat as a board from
end to end; then, turning that side downward, cut the other side til I
brought the plank to be about three inches thick, and smooth on both
sides.  Any one may judge the labour of my hands in such a piece of work;
but labour and patience carried me through that, and many other things.
I only observe this in particular, to show the reason why so much of my
time went away with so little work—viz. that what might be a little to be
done with help and tools, was a vast labour and required a prodigious
time to do alone, and by hand.  But notwithstanding this, with patience
and labour I got through everything that my circumstances made necessary
to me to do, as will appear by what follows.

I was now, in the months of November and December, expecting my crop of
barley and rice.  The ground I had manured and dug up for them was not
great; for, as I observed, my seed of each was not above the quantity of
half a peck, for I had lost one whole crop by sowing in the dry season.
But now my crop promised very well, when on a sudden I found I was in
danger of losing it all again by enemies of several sorts, which it was
scarcely possible to keep from it; as, first, the goats, and wild
creatures which I called hares, who, tasting the sweetness of the blade,
lay in it night and day, as soon as it came up, and eat it so close, that
it could get no time to shoot up into stalk.

This I saw no remedy for but by making an enclosure about it with a
hedge; which I did with a great deal of toil, and the more, because it
required speed.  However, as my arable land was but small, suited to my
crop, I got it totally well fenced in about three weeks’ time; and
shooting some of the creatures in the daytime, I set my dog to guard it
in the night, tying him up to a stake at the gate, where he would stand
and bark all night long; so in a little time the enemies forsook the
place, and the corn grew very strong and well, and began to ripen apace.

But as the beasts ruined me before, while my corn was in the blade, so
the birds were as likely to ruin me now, when it was in the ear; for,
going along by the place to see how it throve, I saw my little crop
surrounded with fowls, of I know not how many sorts, who stood, as it
were, watching till I should be gone.  I immediately let fly among them,
for I always had my gun with me.  I had no sooner shot, but there rose up
a little cloud of fowls, which I had not seen at all, from among the corn
itself.

This touched me sensibly, for I foresaw that in a few days they would
devour all my hopes; that I should be starved, and never be able to raise
a crop at all; and what to do I could not tell; however, I resolved not
to lose my corn, if possible, though I should watch it night and day.  In
the first place, I went among it to see what damage was already done, and
found they had spoiled a good deal of it; but that as it was yet too
green for them, the loss was not so great but that the remainder was
likely to be a good crop if it could be saved.

I stayed by it to load my gun, and then coming away, I could easily see
the thieves sitting upon all the trees about me, as if they only waited
till I was gone away, and the event proved it to be so; for as I walked
off, as if I was gone, I was no sooner out of their sight than they
dropped down one by one into the corn again.  I was so provoked, that I
could not have patience to stay till more came on, knowing that every
grain that they ate now was, as it might be said, a peck-loaf to me in
the consequence; but coming up to the hedge, I fired again, and killed
three of them.  This was what I wished for; so I took them up, and served
them as we serve notorious thieves in England—hanged them in chains, for
a terror to others.  It is impossible to imagine that this should have
such an effect as it had, for the fowls would not only not come at the
corn, but, in short, they forsook all that part of the island, and I
could never see a bird near the place as long as my scarecrows hung
there.  This I was very glad of, you may be sure, and about the latter
end of December, which was our second harvest of the year, I reaped my
corn.

I was sadly put to it for a scythe or sickle to cut it down, and all I
could do was to make one, as well as I could, out of one of the
broadswords, or cutlasses, which I saved among the arms out of the ship.
However, as my first crop was but small, I had no great difficulty to cut
it down; in short, I reaped it in my way, for I cut nothing off but the
ears, and carried it away in a great basket which I had made, and so
rubbed it out with my hands; and at the end of all my harvesting, I found
that out of my half-peck of seed I had near two bushels of rice, and
about two bushels and a half of barley; that is to say, by my guess, for
I had no measure at that time.

However, this was a great encouragement to me, and I foresaw that, in
time, it would please God to supply me with bread.  And yet here I was
perplexed again, for I neither knew how to grind or make meal of my corn,
or indeed how to clean it and part it; nor, if made into meal, how to
make bread of it; and if how to make it, yet I knew not how to bake it.
These things being added to my desire of having a good quantity for
store, and to secure a constant supply, I resolved not to taste any of
this crop but to preserve it all for seed against the next season; and in
the meantime to employ all my study and hours of working to accomplish
this great work of providing myself with corn and bread.

It might be truly said, that now I worked for my bread.  I believe few
people have thought much upon the strange multitude of little things
necessary in the providing, producing, curing, dressing, making, and
finishing this one article of bread.

I, that was reduced to a mere state of nature, found this to my daily
discouragement; and was made more sensible of it every hour, even after I
had got the first handful of seed-corn, which, as I have said, came up
unexpectedly, and indeed to a surprise.

First, I had no plough to turn up the earth—no spade or shovel to dig it.
Well, this I conquered by making me a wooden spade, as I observed before;
but this did my work but in a wooden manner; and though it cost me a
great many days to make it, yet, for want of iron, it not only wore out
soon, but made my work the harder, and made it be performed much worse.
However, this I bore with, and was content to work it out with patience,
and bear with the badness of the performance.  When the corn was sown, I
had no harrow, but was forced to go over it myself, and drag a great
heavy bough of a tree over it, to scratch it, as it may be called, rather
than rake or harrow it.  When it was growing, and grown, I have observed
already how many things I wanted to fence it, secure it, mow or reap it,
cure and carry it home, thrash, part it from the chaff, and save it.
Then I wanted a mill to grind it, sieves to dress it, yeast and salt to
make it into bread, and an oven to bake it; but all these things I did
without, as shall be observed; and yet the corn was an inestimable
comfort and advantage to me too.  All this, as I said, made everything
laborious and tedious to me; but that there was no help for.  Neither was
my time so much loss to me, because, as I had divided it, a certain part
of it was every day appointed to these works; and as I had resolved to
use none of the corn for bread till I had a greater quantity by me, I had
the next six months to apply myself wholly, by labour and invention, to
furnish myself with utensils proper for the performing all the operations
necessary for making the corn, when I had it, fit for my use.




CHAPTER IX—A BOAT


But first I was to prepare more land, for I had now seed enough to sow
above an acre of ground.  Before I did this, I had a week’s work at least
to make me a spade, which, when it was done, was but a sorry one indeed,
and very heavy, and required double labour to work with it.  However, I
got through that, and sowed my seed in two large flat pieces of ground,
as near my house as I could find them to my mind, and fenced them in with
a good hedge, the stakes of which were all cut off that wood which I had
set before, and knew it would grow; so that, in a year’s time, I knew I
should have a quick or living hedge, that would want but little repair.
This work did not take me up less than three months, because a great part
of that time was the wet season, when I could not go abroad.
Within-doors, that is when it rained and I could not go out, I found
employment in the following occupations—always observing, that all the
while I was at work I diverted myself with talking to my parrot, and
teaching him to speak; and I quickly taught him to know his own name, and
at last to speak it out pretty loud, “Poll,” which was the first word I
ever heard spoken in the island by any mouth but my own.  This,
therefore, was not my work, but an assistance to my work; for now, as I
said, I had a great employment upon my hands, as follows: I had long
studied to make, by some means or other, some earthen vessels, which,
indeed, I wanted sorely, but knew not where to come at them.  However,
considering the heat of the climate, I did not doubt but if I could find
out any clay, I might make some pots that might, being dried in the sun,
be hard enough and strong enough to bear handling, and to hold anything
that was dry, and required to be kept so; and as this was necessary in
the preparing corn, meal, &c., which was the thing I was doing, I
resolved to make some as large as I could, and fit only to stand like
jars, to hold what should be put into them.

It would make the reader pity me, or rather laugh at me, to tell how many
awkward ways I took to raise this paste; what odd, misshapen, ugly things
I made; how many of them fell in and how many fell out, the clay not
being stiff enough to bear its own weight; how many cracked by the
over-violent heat of the sun, being set out too hastily; and how many
fell in pieces with only removing, as well before as after they were
dried; and, in a word, how, after having laboured hard to find the
clay—to dig it, to temper it, to bring it home, and work it—I could not
make above two large earthen ugly things (I cannot call them jars) in
about two months’ labour.

However, as the sun baked these two very dry and hard, I lifted them very
gently up, and set them down again in two great wicker baskets, which I
had made on purpose for them, that they might not break; and as between
the pot and the basket there was a little room to spare, I stuffed it
full of the rice and barley straw; and these two pots being to stand
always dry I thought would hold my dry corn, and perhaps the meal, when
the corn was bruised.

Though I miscarried so much in my design for large pots, yet I made
several smaller things with better success; such as little round pots,
flat dishes, pitchers, and pipkins, and any things my hand turned to; and
the heat of the sun baked them quite hard.

But all this would not answer my end, which was to get an earthen pot to
hold what was liquid, and bear the fire, which none of these could do.
It happened after some time, making a pretty large fire for cooking my
meat, when I went to put it out after I had done with it, I found a
broken piece of one of my earthenware vessels in the fire, burnt as hard
as a stone, and red as a tile.  I was agreeably surprised to see it, and
said to myself, that certainly they might be made to burn whole, if they
would burn broken.

This set me to study how to order my fire, so as to make it burn some
pots.  I had no notion of a kiln, such as the potters burn in, or of
glazing them with lead, though I had some lead to do it with; but I
placed three large pipkins and two or three pots in a pile, one upon
another, and placed my firewood all round it, with a great heap of embers
under them.  I plied the fire with fresh fuel round the outside and upon
the top, till I saw the pots in the inside red-hot quite through, and
observed that they did not crack at all.  When I saw them clear red, I
let them stand in that heat about five or six hours, till I found one of
them, though it did not crack, did melt or run; for the sand which was
mixed with the clay melted by the violence of the heat, and would have
run into glass if I had gone on; so I slacked my fire gradually till the
pots began to abate of the red colour; and watching them all night, that
I might not let the fire abate too fast, in the morning I had three very
good (I will not say handsome) pipkins, and two other earthen pots, as
hard burnt as could be desired, and one of them perfectly glazed with the
running of the sand.

After this experiment, I need not say that I wanted no sort of
earthenware for my use; but I must needs say as to the shapes of them,
they were very indifferent, as any one may suppose, when I had no way of
making them but as the children make dirt pies, or as a woman would make
pies that never learned to raise paste.

No joy at a thing of so mean a nature was ever equal to mine, when I
found I had made an earthen pot that would bear the fire; and I had
hardly patience to stay till they were cold before I set one on the fire
again with some water in it to boil me some meat, which it did admirably
well; and with a piece of a kid I made some very good broth, though I
wanted oatmeal, and several other ingredients requisite to make it as
good as I would have had it been.

My next concern was to get me a stone mortar to stamp or beat some corn
in; for as to the mill, there was no thought of arriving at that
perfection of art with one pair of hands.  To supply this want, I was at
a great loss; for, of all the trades in the world, I was as perfectly
unqualified for a stone-cutter as for any whatever; neither had I any
tools to go about it with.  I spent many a day to find out a great stone
big enough to cut hollow, and make fit for a mortar, and could find none
at all, except what was in the solid rock, and which I had no way to dig
or cut out; nor indeed were the rocks in the island of hardness
sufficient, but were all of a sandy, crumbling stone, which neither would
bear the weight of a heavy pestle, nor would break the corn without
filling it with sand.  So, after a great deal of time lost in searching
for a stone, I gave it over, and resolved to look out for a great block
of hard wood, which I found, indeed, much easier; and getting one as big
as I had strength to stir, I rounded it, and formed it on the outside
with my axe and hatchet, and then with the help of fire and infinite
labour, made a hollow place in it, as the Indians in Brazil make their
canoes.  After this, I made a great heavy pestle or beater of the wood
called the iron-wood; and this I prepared and laid by against I had my
next crop of corn, which I proposed to myself to grind, or rather pound
into meal to make bread.

My next difficulty was to make a sieve or searce, to dress my meal, and
to part it from the bran and the husk; without which I did not see it
possible I could have any bread.  This was a most difficult thing even to
think on, for to be sure I had nothing like the necessary thing to make
it—I mean fine thin canvas or stuff to searce the meal through.  And here
I was at a full stop for many months; nor did I really know what to do.
Linen I had none left but what was mere rags; I had goat’s hair, but
neither knew how to weave it or spin it; and had I known how, here were
no tools to work it with.  All the remedy that I found for this was, that
at last I did remember I had, among the seamen’s clothes which were saved
out of the ship, some neckcloths of calico or muslin; and with some
pieces of these I made three small sieves proper enough for the work; and
thus I made shift for some years: how I did afterwards, I shall show in
its place.

The baking part was the next thing to be considered, and how I should
make bread when I came to have corn; for first, I had no yeast.  As to
that part, there was no supplying the want, so I did not concern myself
much about it.  But for an oven I was indeed in great pain.  At length I
found out an experiment for that also, which was this: I made some
earthen-vessels very broad but not deep, that is to say, about two feet
diameter, and not above nine inches deep.  These I burned in the fire, as
I had done the other, and laid them by; and when I wanted to bake, I made
a great fire upon my hearth, which I had paved with some square tiles of
my own baking and burning also; but I should not call them square.

When the firewood was burned pretty much into embers or live coals, I
drew them forward upon this hearth, so as to cover it all over, and there
I let them lie till the hearth was very hot.  Then sweeping away all the
embers, I set down my loaf or loaves, and whelming down the earthen pot
upon them, drew the embers all round the outside of the pot, to keep in
and add to the heat; and thus as well as in the best oven in the world, I
baked my barley-loaves, and became in little time a good pastrycook into
the bargain; for I made myself several cakes and puddings of the rice;
but I made no pies, neither had I anything to put into them supposing I
had, except the flesh either of fowls or goats.

It need not be wondered at if all these things took me up most part of
the third year of my abode here; for it is to be observed that in the
intervals of these things I had my new harvest and husbandry to manage;
for I reaped my corn in its season, and carried it home as well as I
could, and laid it up in the ear, in my large baskets, till I had time to
rub it out, for I had no floor to thrash it on, or instrument to thrash
it with.

And now, indeed, my stock of corn increasing, I really wanted to build my
barns bigger; I wanted a place to lay it up in, for the increase of the
corn now yielded me so much, that I had of the barley about twenty
bushels, and of the rice as much or more; insomuch that now I resolved to
begin to use it freely; for my bread had been quite gone a great while;
also I resolved to see what quantity would be sufficient for me a whole
year, and to sow but once a year.

Upon the whole, I found that the forty bushels of barley and rice were
much more than I could consume in a year; so I resolved to sow just the
same quantity every year that I sowed the last, in hopes that such a
quantity would fully provide me with bread, &c.

All the while these things were doing, you may be sure my thoughts ran
many times upon the prospect of land which I had seen from the other side
of the island; and I was not without secret wishes that I were on shore
there, fancying that, seeing the mainland, and an inhabited country, I
might find some way or other to convey myself further, and perhaps at
last find some means of escape.

But all this while I made no allowance for the dangers of such an
undertaking, and how I might fall into the hands of savages, and perhaps
such as I might have reason to think far worse than the lions and tigers
of Africa: that if I once came in their power, I should run a hazard of
more than a thousand to one of being killed, and perhaps of being eaten;
for I had heard that the people of the Caribbean coast were cannibals or
man-eaters, and I knew by the latitude that I could not be far from that
shore.  Then, supposing they were not cannibals, yet they might kill me,
as many Europeans who had fallen into their hands had been served, even
when they had been ten or twenty together—much more I, that was but one,
and could make little or no defence; all these things, I say, which I
ought to have considered well; and did come into my thoughts afterwards,
yet gave me no apprehensions at first, and my head ran mightily upon the
thought of getting over to the shore.

Now I wished for my boy Xury, and the long-boat with shoulder-of-mutton
sail, with which I sailed above a thousand miles on the coast of Africa;
but this was in vain: then I thought I would go and look at our ship’s
boat, which, as I have said, was blown up upon the shore a great way, in
the storm, when we were first cast away.  She lay almost where she did at
first, but not quite; and was turned, by the force of the waves and the
winds, almost bottom upward, against a high ridge of beachy, rough sand,
but no water about her.  If I had had hands to have refitted her, and to
have launched her into the water, the boat would have done well enough,
and I might have gone back into the Brazils with her easily enough; but I
might have foreseen that I could no more turn her and set her upright
upon her bottom than I could remove the island; however, I went to the
woods, and cut levers and rollers, and brought them to the boat resolving
to try what I could do; suggesting to myself that if I could but turn her
down, I might repair the damage she had received, and she would be a very
good boat, and I might go to sea in her very easily.

I spared no pains, indeed, in this piece of fruitless toil, and spent, I
think, three or four weeks about it; at last finding it impossible to
heave it up with my little strength, I fell to digging away the sand, to
undermine it, and so to make it fall down, setting pieces of wood to
thrust and guide it right in the fall.

But when I had done this, I was unable to stir it up again, or to get
under it, much less to move it forward towards the water; so I was forced
to give it over; and yet, though I gave over the hopes of the boat, my
desire to venture over for the main increased, rather than decreased, as
the means for it seemed impossible.

This at length put me upon thinking whether it was not possible to make
myself a canoe, or periagua, such as the natives of those climates make,
even without tools, or, as I might say, without hands, of the trunk of a
great tree.  This I not only thought possible, but easy, and pleased
myself extremely with the thoughts of making it, and with my having much
more convenience for it than any of the negroes or Indians; but not at
all considering the particular inconveniences which I lay under more than
the Indians did—viz. want of hands to move it, when it was made, into the
water—a difficulty much harder for me to surmount than all the
consequences of want of tools could be to them; for what was it to me, if
when I had chosen a vast tree in the woods, and with much trouble cut it
down, if I had been able with my tools to hew and dub the outside into
the proper shape of a boat, and burn or cut out the inside to make it
hollow, so as to make a boat of it—if, after all this, I must leave it
just there where I found it, and not be able to launch it into the water?

One would have thought I could not have had the least reflection upon my
mind of my circumstances while I was making this boat, but I should have
immediately thought how I should get it into the sea; but my thoughts
were so intent upon my voyage over the sea in it, that I never once
considered how I should get it off the land: and it was really, in its
own nature, more easy for me to guide it over forty-five miles of sea
than about forty-five fathoms of land, where it lay, to set it afloat in
the water.

I went to work upon this boat the most like a fool that ever man did who
had any of his senses awake.  I pleased myself with the design, without
determining whether I was ever able to undertake it; not but that the
difficulty of launching my boat came often into my head; but I put a stop
to my inquiries into it by this foolish answer which I gave myself—“Let
me first make it; I warrant I will find some way or other to get it along
when it is done.”

This was a most preposterous method; but the eagerness of my fancy
prevailed, and to work I went.  I felled a cedar-tree, and I question
much whether Solomon ever had such a one for the building of the Temple
of Jerusalem; it was five feet ten inches diameter at the lower part next
the stump, and four feet eleven inches diameter at the end of twenty-two
feet; after which it lessened for a while, and then parted into branches.
It was not without infinite labour that I felled this tree; I was twenty
days hacking and hewing at it at the bottom; I was fourteen more getting
the branches and limbs and the vast spreading head cut off, which I
hacked and hewed through with axe and hatchet, and inexpressible labour;
after this, it cost me a month to shape it and dub it to a proportion,
and to something like the bottom of a boat, that it might swim upright as
it ought to do.  It cost me near three months more to clear the inside,
and work it out so as to make an exact boat of it; this I did, indeed,
without fire, by mere mallet and chisel, and by the dint of hard labour,
till I had brought it to be a very handsome periagua, and big enough to
have carried six-and-twenty men, and consequently big enough to have
carried me and all my cargo.

When I had gone through this work I was extremely delighted with it.  The
boat was really much bigger than ever I saw a canoe or periagua, that was
made of one tree, in my life.  Many a weary stroke it had cost, you may
be sure; and had I gotten it into the water, I make no question, but I
should have begun the maddest voyage, and the most unlikely to be
performed, that ever was undertaken.

But all my devices to get it into the water failed me; though they cost
me infinite labour too.  It lay about one hundred yards from the water,
and not more; but the first inconvenience was, it was up hill towards the
creek.  Well, to take away this discouragement, I resolved to dig into
the surface of the earth, and so make a declivity: this I began, and it
cost me a prodigious deal of pains (but who grudge pains who have their
deliverance in view?); but when this was worked through, and this
difficulty managed, it was still much the same, for I could no more stir
the canoe than I could the other boat.  Then I measured the distance of
ground, and resolved to cut a dock or canal, to bring the water up to the
canoe, seeing I could not bring the canoe down to the water.  Well, I
began this work; and when I began to enter upon it, and calculate how
deep it was to be dug, how broad, how the stuff was to be thrown out, I
found that, by the number of hands I had, being none but my own, it must
have been ten or twelve years before I could have gone through with it;
for the shore lay so high, that at the upper end it must have been at
least twenty feet deep; so at length, though with great reluctancy, I
gave this attempt over also.

This grieved me heartily; and now I saw, though too late, the folly of
beginning a work before we count the cost, and before we judge rightly of
our own strength to go through with it.

In the middle of this work I finished my fourth year in this place, and
kept my anniversary with the same devotion, and with as much comfort as
ever before; for, by a constant study and serious application to the Word
of God, and by the assistance of His grace, I gained a different
knowledge from what I had before.  I entertained different notions of
things.  I looked now upon the world as a thing remote, which I had
nothing to do with, no expectations from, and, indeed, no desires about:
in a word, I had nothing indeed to do with it, nor was ever likely to
have, so I thought it looked, as we may perhaps look upon it
hereafter—viz. as a place I had lived in, but was come out of it; and
well might I say, as Father Abraham to Dives, “Between me and thee is a
great gulf fixed.”

In the first place, I was removed from all the wickedness of the world
here; I had neither the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, nor the
pride of life.  I had nothing to covet, for I had all that I was now
capable of enjoying; I was lord of the whole manor; or, if I pleased, I
might call myself king or emperor over the whole country which I had
possession of: there were no rivals; I had no competitor, none to dispute
sovereignty or command with me: I might have raised ship-loadings of
corn, but I had no use for it; so I let as little grow as I thought
enough for my occasion.  I had tortoise or turtle enough, but now and
then one was as much as I could put to any use: I had timber enough to
have built a fleet of ships; and I had grapes enough to have made wine,
or to have cured into raisins, to have loaded that fleet when it had been
built.

But all I could make use of was all that was valuable: I had enough to
eat and supply my wants, and what was all the rest to me?  If I killed
more flesh than I could eat, the dog must eat it, or vermin; if I sowed
more corn than I could eat, it must be spoiled; the trees that I cut down
were lying to rot on the ground; I could make no more use of them but for
fuel, and that I had no occasion for but to dress my food.

In a word, the nature and experience of things dictated to me, upon just
reflection, that all the good things of this world are no farther good to
us than they are for our use; and that, whatever we may heap up to give
others, we enjoy just as much as we can use, and no more.  The most
covetous, griping miser in the world would have been cured of the vice of
covetousness if he had been in my case; for I possessed infinitely more
than I knew what to do with.  I had no room for desire, except it was of
things which I had not, and they were but trifles, though, indeed, of
great use to me.  I had, as I hinted before, a parcel of money, as well
gold as silver, about thirty-six pounds sterling.  Alas! there the sorry,
useless stuff lay; I had no more manner of business for it; and often
thought with myself that I would have given a handful of it for a gross
of tobacco-pipes; or for a hand-mill to grind my corn; nay, I would have
given it all for a sixpenny-worth of turnip and carrot seed out of
England, or for a handful of peas and beans, and a bottle of ink.  As it
was, I had not the least advantage by it or benefit from it; but there it
lay in a drawer, and grew mouldy with the damp of the cave in the wet
seasons; and if I had had the drawer full of diamonds, it had been the
same case—they had been of no manner of value to me, because of no use.

I had now brought my state of life to be much easier in itself than it
was at first, and much easier to my mind, as well as to my body.  I
frequently sat down to meat with thankfulness, and admired the hand of
God’s providence, which had thus spread my table in the wilderness.  I
learned to look more upon the bright side of my condition, and less upon
the dark side, and to consider what I enjoyed rather than what I wanted;
and this gave me sometimes such secret comforts, that I cannot express
them; and which I take notice of here, to put those discontented people
in mind of it, who cannot enjoy comfortably what God has given them,
because they see and covet something that He has not given them.  All our
discontents about what we want appeared to me to spring from the want of
thankfulness for what we have.

Another reflection was of great use to me, and doubtless would be so to
any one that should fall into such distress as mine was; and this was, to
compare my present condition with what I at first expected it would be;
nay, with what it would certainly have been, if the good providence of
God had not wonderfully ordered the ship to be cast up nearer to the
shore, where I not only could come at her, but could bring what I got out
of her to the shore, for my relief and comfort; without which, I had
wanted for tools to work, weapons for defence, and gunpowder and shot for
getting my food.

I spent whole hours, I may say whole days, in representing to myself, in
the most lively colours, how I must have acted if I had got nothing out
of the ship.  How I could not have so much as got any food, except fish
and turtles; and that, as it was long before I found any of them, I must
have perished first; that I should have lived, if I had not perished,
like a mere savage; that if I had killed a goat or a fowl, by any
contrivance, I had no way to flay or open it, or part the flesh from the
skin and the bowels, or to cut it up; but must gnaw it with my teeth, and
pull it with my claws, like a beast.

These reflections made me very sensible of the goodness of Providence to
me, and very thankful for my present condition, with all its hardships
and misfortunes; and this part also I cannot but recommend to the
reflection of those who are apt, in their misery, to say, “Is any
affliction like mine?”  Let them consider how much worse the cases of
some people are, and their case might have been, if Providence had
thought fit.

I had another reflection, which assisted me also to comfort my mind with
hopes; and this was comparing my present situation with what I had
deserved, and had therefore reason to expect from the hand of Providence.
I had lived a dreadful life, perfectly destitute of the knowledge and
fear of God.  I had been well instructed by father and mother; neither
had they been wanting to me in their early endeavours to infuse a
religious awe of God into my mind, a sense of my duty, and what the
nature and end of my being required of me.  But, alas! falling early into
the seafaring life, which of all lives is the most destitute of the fear
of God, though His terrors are always before them; I say, falling early
into the seafaring life, and into seafaring company, all that little
sense of religion which I had entertained was laughed out of me by my
messmates; by a hardened despising of dangers, and the views of death,
which grew habitual to me by my long absence from all manner of
opportunities to converse with anything but what was like myself, or to
hear anything that was good or tended towards it.

So void was I of everything that was good, or the least sense of what I
was, or was to be, that, in the greatest deliverances I enjoyed—such as
my escape from Sallee; my being taken up by the Portuguese master of the
ship; my being planted so well in the Brazils; my receiving the cargo
from England, and the like—I never had once the words “Thank God!” so
much as on my mind, or in my mouth; nor in the greatest distress had I so
much as a thought to pray to Him, or so much as to say, “Lord, have mercy
upon me!” no, nor to mention the name of God, unless it was to swear by,
and blaspheme it.

I had terrible reflections upon my mind for many months, as I have
already observed, on account of my wicked and hardened life past; and
when I looked about me, and considered what particular providences had
attended me since my coming into this place, and how God had dealt
bountifully with me—had not only punished me less than my iniquity had
deserved, but had so plentifully provided for me—this gave me great hopes
that my repentance was accepted, and that God had yet mercy in store for
me.

With these reflections I worked my mind up, not only to a resignation to
the will of God in the present disposition of my circumstances, but even
to a sincere thankfulness for my condition; and that I, who was yet a
living man, ought not to complain, seeing I had not the due punishment of
my sins; that I enjoyed so many mercies which I had no reason to have
expected in that place; that I ought never more to repine at my
condition, but to rejoice, and to give daily thanks for that daily bread,
which nothing but a crowd of wonders could have brought; that I ought to
consider I had been fed even by a miracle, even as great as that of
feeding Elijah by ravens, nay, by a long series of miracles; and that I
could hardly have named a place in the uninhabitable part of the world
where I could have been cast more to my advantage; a place where, as I
had no society, which was my affliction on one hand, so I found no
ravenous beasts, no furious wolves or tigers, to threaten my life; no
venomous creatures, or poisons, which I might feed on to my hurt; no
savages to murder and devour me.  In a word, as my life was a life of
sorrow one way, so it was a life of mercy another; and I wanted nothing
to make it a life of comfort but to be able to make my sense of God’s
goodness to me, and care over me in this condition, be my daily
consolation; and after I did make a just improvement on these things, I
went away, and was no more sad.  I had now been here so long that many
things which I had brought on shore for my help were either quite gone,
or very much wasted and near spent.

My ink, as I observed, had been gone some time, all but a very little,
which I eked out with water, a little and a little, till it was so pale,
it scarce left any appearance of black upon the paper.  As long as it
lasted I made use of it to minute down the days of the month on which any
remarkable thing happened to me; and first, by casting up times past, I
remembered that there was a strange concurrence of days in the various
providences which befell me, and which, if I had been superstitiously
inclined to observe days as fatal or fortunate, I might have had reason
to have looked upon with a great deal of curiosity.

First, I had observed that the same day that I broke away from my father
and friends and ran away to Hull, in order to go to sea, the same day
afterwards I was taken by the Sallee man-of-war, and made a slave; the
same day of the year that I escaped out of the wreck of that ship in
Yarmouth Roads, that same day-year afterwards I made my escape from
Sallee in a boat; the same day of the year I was born on—viz. the 30th of
September, that same day I had my life so miraculously saved twenty-six
years after, when I was cast on shore in this island; so that my wicked
life and my solitary life began both on a day.

The next thing to my ink being wasted was that of my bread—I mean the
biscuit which I brought out of the ship; this I had husbanded to the last
degree, allowing myself but one cake of bread a-day for above a year; and
yet I was quite without bread for near a year before I got any corn of my
own, and great reason I had to be thankful that I had any at all, the
getting it being, as has been already observed, next to miraculous.

My clothes, too, began to decay; as to linen, I had had none a good
while, except some chequered shirts which I found in the chests of the
other seamen, and which I carefully preserved; because many times I could
bear no other clothes on but a shirt; and it was a very great help to me
that I had, among all the men’s clothes of the ship, almost three dozen
of shirts.  There were also, indeed, several thick watch-coats of the
seamen’s which were left, but they were too hot to wear; and though it is
true that the weather was so violently hot that there was no need of
clothes, yet I could not go quite naked—no, though I had been inclined to
it, which I was not—nor could I abide the thought of it, though I was
alone.  The reason why I could not go naked was, I could not bear the
heat of the sun so well when quite naked as with some clothes on; nay,
the very heat frequently blistered my skin: whereas, with a shirt on, the
air itself made some motion, and whistling under the shirt, was twofold
cooler than without it.  No more could I ever bring myself to go out in
the heat of the sun without a cap or a hat; the heat of the sun, beating
with such violence as it does in that place, would give me the headache
presently, by darting so directly on my head, without a cap or hat on, so
that I could not bear it; whereas, if I put on my hat it would presently
go away.

Upon these views I began to consider about putting the few rags I had,
which I called clothes, into some order; I had worn out all the
waistcoats I had, and my business was now to try if I could not make
jackets out of the great watch-coats which I had by me, and with such
other materials as I had; so I set to work, tailoring, or rather, indeed,
botching, for I made most piteous work of it.  However, I made shift to
make two or three new waistcoats, which I hoped would serve me a great
while: as for breeches or drawers, I made but a very sorry shift indeed
till afterwards.

I have mentioned that I saved the skins of all the creatures that I
killed, I mean four-footed ones, and I had them hung up, stretched out
with sticks in the sun, by which means some of them were so dry and hard
that they were fit for little, but others were very useful.  The first
thing I made of these was a great cap for my head, with the hair on the
outside, to shoot off the rain; and this I performed so well, that after
I made me a suit of clothes wholly of these skins—that is to say, a
waistcoat, and breeches open at the knees, and both loose, for they were
rather wanting to keep me cool than to keep me warm.  I must not omit to
acknowledge that they were wretchedly made; for if I was a bad carpenter,
I was a worse tailor.  However, they were such as I made very good shift
with, and when I was out, if it happened to rain, the hair of my
waistcoat and cap being outermost, I was kept very dry.

After this, I spent a great deal of time and pains to make an umbrella; I
was, indeed, in great want of one, and had a great mind to make one; I
had seen them made in the Brazils, where they are very useful in the
great heats there, and I felt the heats every jot as great here, and
greater too, being nearer the equinox; besides, as I was obliged to be
much abroad, it was a most useful thing to me, as well for the rains as
the heats.  I took a world of pains with it, and was a great while before
I could make anything likely to hold: nay, after I had thought I had hit
the way, I spoiled two or three before I made one to my mind: but at last
I made one that answered indifferently well: the main difficulty I found
was to make it let down.  I could make it spread, but if it did not let
down too, and draw in, it was not portable for me any way but just over
my head, which would not do.  However, at last, as I said, I made one to
answer, and covered it with skins, the hair upwards, so that it cast off
the rain like a pent-house, and kept off the sun so effectually, that I
could walk out in the hottest of the weather with greater advantage than
I could before in the coolest, and when I had no need of it could close
it, and carry it under my arm.

Thus I lived mighty comfortably, my mind being entirely composed by
resigning myself to the will of God, and throwing myself wholly upon the
disposal of His providence.  This made my life better than sociable, for
when I began to regret the want of conversation I would ask myself,
whether thus conversing mutually with my own thoughts, and (as I hope I
may say) with even God Himself, by ejaculations, was not better than the
utmost enjoyment of human society in the world?




CHAPTER X—TAMES GOATS


I cannot say that after this, for five years, any extraordinary thing
happened to me, but I lived on in the same course, in the same posture
and place, as before; the chief things I was employed in, besides my
yearly labour of planting my barley and rice, and curing my raisins, of
both which I always kept up just enough to have sufficient stock of one
year’s provisions beforehand; I say, besides this yearly labour, and my
daily pursuit of going out with my gun, I had one labour, to make a
canoe, which at last I finished: so that, by digging a canal to it of six
feet wide and four feet deep, I brought it into the creek, almost half a
mile.  As for the first, which was so vastly big, for I made it without
considering beforehand, as I ought to have done, how I should be able to
launch it, so, never being able to bring it into the water, or bring the
water to it, I was obliged to let it lie where it was as a memorandum to
teach me to be wiser the next time: indeed, the next time, though I could
not get a tree proper for it, and was in a place where I could not get
the water to it at any less distance than, as I have said, near half a
mile, yet, as I saw it was practicable at last, I never gave it over; and
though I was near two years about it, yet I never grudged my labour, in
hopes of having a boat to go off to sea at last.

However, though my little periagua was finished, yet the size of it was
not at all answerable to the design which I had in view when I made the
first; I mean of venturing over to the _terra firma_, where it was above
forty miles broad; accordingly, the smallness of my boat assisted to put
an end to that design, and now I thought no more of it.  As I had a boat,
my next design was to make a cruise round the island; for as I had been
on the other side in one place, crossing, as I have already described it,
over the land, so the discoveries I made in that little journey made me
very eager to see other parts of the coast; and now I had a boat, I
thought of nothing but sailing round the island.

For this purpose, that I might do everything with discretion and
consideration, I fitted up a little mast in my boat, and made a sail too
out of some of the pieces of the ship’s sails which lay in store, and of
which I had a great stock by me.  Having fitted my mast and sail, and
tried the boat, I found she would sail very well; then I made little
lockers or boxes at each end of my boat, to put provisions, necessaries,
ammunition, &c., into, to be kept dry, either from rain or the spray of
the sea; and a little, long, hollow place I cut in the inside of the
boat, where I could lay my gun, making a flap to hang down over it to
keep it dry.

I fixed my umbrella also in the step at the stern, like a mast, to stand
over my head, and keep the heat of the sun off me, like an awning; and
thus I every now and then took a little voyage upon the sea, but never
went far out, nor far from the little creek.  At last, being eager to
view the circumference of my little kingdom, I resolved upon my cruise;
and accordingly I victualled my ship for the voyage, putting in two dozen
of loaves (cakes I should call them) of barley-bread, an earthen pot full
of parched rice (a food I ate a good deal of), a little bottle of rum,
half a goat, and powder and shot for killing more, and two large
watch-coats, of those which, as I mentioned before, I had saved out of
the seamen’s chests; these I took, one to lie upon, and the other to
cover me in the night.

It was the 6th of November, in the sixth year of my reign—or my
captivity, which you please—that I set out on this voyage, and I found it
much longer than I expected; for though the island itself was not very
large, yet when I came to the east side of it, I found a great ledge of
rocks lie out about two leagues into the sea, some above water, some
under it; and beyond that a shoal of sand, lying dry half a league more,
so that I was obliged to go a great way out to sea to double the point.

When I first discovered them, I was going to give over my enterprise, and
come back again, not knowing how far it might oblige me to go out to sea;
and above all, doubting how I should get back again: so I came to an
anchor; for I had made a kind of an anchor with a piece of a broken
grappling which I got out of the ship.

Having secured my boat, I took my gun and went on shore, climbing up a
hill, which seemed to overlook that point where I saw the full extent of
it, and resolved to venture.

In my viewing the sea from that hill where I stood, I perceived a strong,
and indeed a most furious current, which ran to the east, and even came
close to the point; and I took the more notice of it because I saw there
might be some danger that when I came into it I might be carried out to
sea by the strength of it, and not be able to make the island again; and
indeed, had I not got first upon this hill, I believe it would have been
so; for there was the same current on the other side the island, only
that it set off at a further distance, and I saw there was a strong eddy
under the shore; so I had nothing to do but to get out of the first
current, and I should presently be in an eddy.

I lay here, however, two days, because the wind blowing pretty fresh at
ESE., and that being just contrary to the current, made a great breach of
the sea upon the point: so that it was not safe for me to keep too close
to the shore for the breach, nor to go too far off, because of the
stream.

The third day, in the morning, the wind having abated overnight, the sea
was calm, and I ventured: but I am a warning to all rash and ignorant
pilots; for no sooner was I come to the point, when I was not even my
boat’s length from the shore, but I found myself in a great depth of
water, and a current like the sluice of a mill; it carried my boat along
with it with such violence that all I could do could not keep her so much
as on the edge of it; but I found it hurried me farther and farther out
from the eddy, which was on my left hand.  There was no wind stirring to
help me, and all I could do with my paddles signified nothing: and now I
began to give myself over for lost; for as the current was on both sides
of the island, I knew in a few leagues distance they must join again, and
then I was irrecoverably gone; nor did I see any possibility of avoiding
it; so that I had no prospect before me but of perishing, not by the sea,
for that was calm enough, but of starving from hunger.  I had, indeed,
found a tortoise on the shore, as big almost as I could lift, and had
tossed it into the boat; and I had a great jar of fresh water, that is to
say, one of my earthen pots; but what was all this to being driven into
the vast ocean, where, to be sure, there was no shore, no mainland or
island, for a thousand leagues at least?

And now I saw how easy it was for the providence of God to make even the
most miserable condition of mankind worse.  Now I looked back upon my
desolate, solitary island as the most pleasant place in the world and all
the happiness my heart could wish for was to be but there again.  I
stretched out my hands to it, with eager wishes—“O happy desert!” said I,
“I shall never see thee more.  O miserable creature! whither am going?”
Then I reproached myself with my unthankful temper, and that I had
repined at my solitary condition; and now what would I give to be on
shore there again!  Thus, we never see the true state of our condition
till it is illustrated to us by its contraries, nor know how to value
what we enjoy, but by the want of it.  It is scarcely possible to imagine
the consternation I was now in, being driven from my beloved island (for
so it appeared to me now to be) into the wide ocean, almost two leagues,
and in the utmost despair of ever recovering it again.  However, I worked
hard till, indeed, my strength was almost exhausted, and kept my boat as
much to the northward, that is, towards the side of the current which the
eddy lay on, as possibly I could; when about noon, as the sun passed the
meridian, I thought I felt a little breeze of wind in my face, springing
up from SSE.  This cheered my heart a little, and especially when, in
about half-an-hour more, it blew a pretty gentle gale.  By this time I
had got at a frightful distance from the island, and had the least cloudy
or hazy weather intervened, I had been undone another way, too; for I had
no compass on board, and should never have known how to have steered
towards the island, if I had but once lost sight of it; but the weather
continuing clear, I applied myself to get up my mast again, and spread my
sail, standing away to the north as much as possible, to get out of the
current.

Just as I had set my mast and sail, and the boat began to stretch away, I
saw even by the clearness of the water some alteration of the current was
near; for where the current was so strong the water was foul; but
perceiving the water clear, I found the current abate; and presently I
found to the east, at about half a mile, a breach of the sea upon some
rocks: these rocks I found caused the current to part again, and as the
main stress of it ran away more southerly, leaving the rocks to the
north-east, so the other returned by the repulse of the rocks, and made a
strong eddy, which ran back again to the north-west, with a very sharp
stream.

They who know what it is to have a reprieve brought to them upon the
ladder, or to be rescued from thieves just going to murder them, or who
have been in such extremities, may guess what my present surprise of joy
was, and how gladly I put my boat into the stream of this eddy; and the
wind also freshening, how gladly I spread my sail to it, running
cheerfully before the wind, and with a strong tide or eddy underfoot.

This eddy carried me about a league on my way back again, directly
towards the island, but about two leagues more to the northward than the
current which carried me away at first; so that when I came near the
island, I found myself open to the northern shore of it, that is to say,
the other end of the island, opposite to that which I went out from.

When I had made something more than a league of way by the help of this
current or eddy, I found it was spent, and served me no further.
However, I found that being between two great currents—viz. that on the
south side, which had hurried me away, and that on the north, which lay
about a league on the other side; I say, between these two, in the wake
of the island, I found the water at least still, and running no way; and
having still a breeze of wind fair for me, I kept on steering directly
for the island, though not making such fresh way as I did before.

About four o’clock in the evening, being then within a league of the
island, I found the point of the rocks which occasioned this disaster
stretching out, as is described before, to the southward, and casting off
the current more southerly, had, of course, made another eddy to the
north; and this I found very strong, but not directly setting the way my
course lay, which was due west, but almost full north.  However, having a
fresh gale, I stretched across this eddy, slanting north-west; and in
about an hour came within about a mile of the shore, where, it being
smooth water, I soon got to land.

When I was on shore, God I fell on my knees and gave God thanks for my
deliverance, resolving to lay aside all thoughts of my deliverance by my
boat; and refreshing myself with such things as I had, I brought my boat
close to the shore, in a little cove that I had spied under some trees,
and laid me down to sleep, being quite spent with the labour and fatigue
of the voyage.

I was now at a great loss which way to get home with my boat!  I had run
so much hazard, and knew too much of the case, to think of attempting it
by the way I went out; and what might be at the other side (I mean the
west side) I knew not, nor had I any mind to run any more ventures; so I
resolved on the next morning to make my way westward along the shore, and
to see if there was no creek where I might lay up my frigate in safety,
so as to have her again if I wanted her.  In about three miles or
thereabouts, coasting the shore, I came to a very good inlet or bay,
about a mile over, which narrowed till it came to a very little rivulet
or brook, where I found a very convenient harbour for my boat, and where
she lay as if she had been in a little dock made on purpose for her.
Here I put in, and having stowed my boat very safe, I went on shore to
look about me, and see where I was.

I soon found I had but a little passed by the place where I had been
before, when I travelled on foot to that shore; so taking nothing out of
my boat but my gun and umbrella, for it was exceedingly hot, I began my
march.  The way was comfortable enough after such a voyage as I had been
upon, and I reached my old bower in the evening, where I found everything
standing as I left it; for I always kept it in good order, being, as I
said before, my country house.

I got over the fence, and laid me down in the shade to rest my limbs, for
I was very weary, and fell asleep; but judge you, if you can, that read
my story, what a surprise I must be in when I was awaked out of my sleep
by a voice calling me by my name several times, “Robin, Robin, Robin
Crusoe: poor Robin Crusoe!  Where are you, Robin Crusoe?  Where are you?
Where have you been?”

I was so dead asleep at first, being fatigued with rowing, or part of the
day, and with walking the latter part, that I did not wake thoroughly;
but dozing thought I dreamed that somebody spoke to me; but as the voice
continued to repeat, “Robin Crusoe, Robin Crusoe,” at last I began to
wake more perfectly, and was at first dreadfully frightened, and started
up in the utmost consternation; but no sooner were my eyes open, but I
saw my Poll sitting on the top of the hedge; and immediately knew that it
was he that spoke to me; for just in such bemoaning language I had used
to talk to him and teach him; and he had learned it so perfectly that he
would sit upon my finger, and lay his bill close to my face and cry,
“Poor Robin Crusoe!  Where are you?  Where have you been?  How came you
here?” and such things as I had taught him.

However, even though I knew it was the parrot, and that indeed it could
be nobody else, it was a good while before I could compose myself.
First, I was amazed how the creature got thither; and then, how he should
just keep about the place, and nowhere else; but as I was well satisfied
it could be nobody but honest Poll, I got over it; and holding out my
hand, and calling him by his name, “Poll,” the sociable creature came to
me, and sat upon my thumb, as he used to do, and continued talking to me,
“Poor Robin Crusoe! and how did I come here? and where had I been?” just
as if he had been overjoyed to see me again; and so I carried him home
along with me.

I had now had enough of rambling to sea for some time, and had enough to
do for many days to sit still and reflect upon the danger I had been in.
I would have been very glad to have had my boat again on my side of the
island; but I knew not how it was practicable to get it about.  As to the
east side of the island, which I had gone round, I knew well enough there
was no venturing that way; my very heart would shrink, and my very blood
run chill, but to think of it; and as to the other side of the island, I
did not know how it might be there; but supposing the current ran with
the same force against the shore at the east as it passed by it on the
other, I might run the same risk of being driven down the stream, and
carried by the island, as I had been before of being carried away from
it: so with these thoughts, I contented myself to be without any boat,
though it had been the product of so many months’ labour to make it, and
of so many more to get it into the sea.

In this government of my temper I remained near a year; and lived a very
sedate, retired life, as you may well suppose; and my thoughts being very
much composed as to my condition, and fully comforted in resigning myself
to the dispositions of Providence, I thought I lived really very happily
in all things except that of society.

I improved myself in this time in all the mechanic exercises which my
necessities put me upon applying myself to; and I believe I should, upon
occasion, have made a very good carpenter, especially considering how few
tools I had.

Besides this, I arrived at an unexpected perfection in my earthenware,
and contrived well enough to make them with a wheel, which I found
infinitely easier and better; because I made things round and shaped,
which before were filthy things indeed to look on.  But I think I was
never more vain of my own performance, or more joyful for anything I
found out, than for my being able to make a tobacco-pipe; and though it
was a very ugly, clumsy thing when it was done, and only burned red, like
other earthenware, yet as it was hard and firm, and would draw the smoke,
I was exceedingly comforted with it, for I had been always used to smoke;
and there were pipes in the ship, but I forgot them at first, not
thinking there was tobacco in the island; and afterwards, when I searched
the ship again, I could not come at any pipes.

In my wicker-ware also I improved much, and made abundance of necessary
baskets, as well as my invention showed me; though not very handsome, yet
they were such as were very handy and convenient for laying things up in,
or fetching things home.  For example, if I killed a goat abroad, I could
hang it up in a tree, flay it, dress it, and cut it in pieces, and bring
it home in a basket; and the like by a turtle; I could cut it up, take
out the eggs and a piece or two of the flesh, which was enough for me,
and bring them home in a basket, and leave the rest behind me.  Also,
large deep baskets were the receivers of my corn, which I always rubbed
out as soon as it was dry and cured, and kept it in great baskets.

I began now to perceive my powder abated considerably; this was a want
which it was impossible for me to supply, and I began seriously to
consider what I must do when I should have no more powder; that is to
say, how I should kill any goats.  I had, as is observed in the third
year of my being here, kept a young kid, and bred her up tame, and I was
in hopes of getting a he-goat; but I could not by any means bring it to
pass, till my kid grew an old goat; and as I could never find in my heart
to kill her, she died at last of mere age.

But being now in the eleventh year of my residence, and, as I have said,
my ammunition growing low, I set myself to study some art to trap and
snare the goats, to see whether I could not catch some of them alive; and
particularly I wanted a she-goat great with young.  For this purpose I
made snares to hamper them; and I do believe they were more than once
taken in them; but my tackle was not good, for I had no wire, and I
always found them broken and my bait devoured.  At length I resolved to
try a pitfall; so I dug several large pits in the earth, in places where
I had observed the goats used to feed, and over those pits I placed
hurdles of my own making too, with a great weight upon them; and several
times I put ears of barley and dry rice without setting the trap; and I
could easily perceive that the goats had gone in and eaten up the corn,
for I could see the marks of their feet.  At length I set three traps in
one night, and going the next morning I found them, all standing, and yet
the bait eaten and gone; this was very discouraging.  However, I altered
my traps; and not to trouble you with particulars, going one morning to
see my traps, I found in one of them a large old he-goat; and in one of
the others three kids, a male and two females.

As to the old one, I knew not what to do with him; he was so fierce I
durst not go into the pit to him; that is to say, to bring him away
alive, which was what I wanted.  I could have killed him, but that was
not my business, nor would it answer my end; so I even let him out, and
he ran away as if he had been frightened out of his wits.  But I did not
then know what I afterwards learned, that hunger will tame a lion.  If I
had let him stay three or four days without food, and then have carried
him some water to drink and then a little corn, he would have been as
tame as one of the kids; for they are mighty sagacious, tractable
creatures, where they are well used.

However, for the present I let him go, knowing no better at that time:
then I went to the three kids, and taking them one by one, I tied them
with strings together, and with some difficulty brought them all home.

It was a good while before they would feed; but throwing them some sweet
corn, it tempted them, and they began to be tame.  And now I found that
if I expected to supply myself with goats’ flesh, when I had no powder or
shot left, breeding some up tame was my only way, when, perhaps, I might
have them about my house like a flock of sheep.  But then it occurred to
me that I must keep the tame from the wild, or else they would always run
wild when they grew up; and the only way for this was to have some
enclosed piece of ground, well fenced either with hedge or pale, to keep
them in so effectually, that those within might not break out, or those
without break in.

This was a great undertaking for one pair of hands yet, as I saw there
was an absolute necessity for doing it, my first work was to find out a
proper piece of ground, where there was likely to be herbage for them to
eat, water for them to drink, and cover to keep them from the sun.

Those who understand such enclosures will think I had very little
contrivance when I pitched upon a place very proper for all these (being
a plain, open piece of meadow land, or savannah, as our people call it in
the western colonies), which had two or three little drills of fresh
water in it, and at one end was very woody—I say, they will smile at my
forecast, when I shall tell them I began by enclosing this piece of
ground in such a manner that, my hedge or pale must have been at least
two miles about.  Nor was the madness of it so great as to the compass,
for if it was ten miles about, I was like to have time enough to do it
in; but I did not consider that my goats would be as wild in so much
compass as if they had had the whole island, and I should have so much
room to chase them in that I should never catch them.

My hedge was begun and carried on, I believe, about fifty yards when this
thought occurred to me; so I presently stopped short, and, for the
beginning, I resolved to enclose a piece of about one hundred and fifty
yards in length, and one hundred yards in breadth, which, as it would
maintain as many as I should have in any reasonable time, so, as my stock
increased, I could add more ground to my enclosure.

This was acting with some prudence, and I went to work with courage.  I
was about three months hedging in the first piece; and, till I had done
it, I tethered the three kids in the best part of it, and used them to
feed as near me as possible, to make them familiar; and very often I
would go and carry them some ears of barley, or a handful of rice, and
feed them out of my hand; so that after my enclosure was finished and I
let them loose, they would follow me up and down, bleating after me for a
handful of corn.

This answered my end, and in about a year and a half I had a flock of
about twelve goats, kids and all; and in two years more I had
three-and-forty, besides several that I took and killed for my food.
After that, I enclosed five several pieces of ground to feed them in,
with little pens to drive them to take them as I wanted, and gates out of
one piece of ground into another.

But this was not all; for now I not only had goat’s flesh to feed on when
I pleased, but milk too—a thing which, indeed, in the beginning, I did
not so much as think of, and which, when it came into my thoughts, was
really an agreeable surprise, for now I set up my dairy, and had
sometimes a gallon or two of milk in a day.  And as Nature, who gives
supplies of food to every creature, dictates even naturally how to make
use of it, so I, that had never milked a cow, much less a goat, or seen
butter or cheese made only when I was a boy, after a great many essays
and miscarriages, made both butter and cheese at last, also salt (though
I found it partly made to my hand by the heat of the sun upon some of the
rocks of the sea), and never wanted it afterwards.  How mercifully can
our Creator treat His creatures, even in those conditions in which they
seemed to be overwhelmed in destruction!  How can He sweeten the
bitterest providences, and give us cause to praise Him for dungeons and
prisons!  What a table was here spread for me in the wilderness, where I
saw nothing at first but to perish for hunger!




CHAPTER XI—FINDS PRINT OF MAN’S FOOT ON THE SAND


It would have made a Stoic smile to have seen me and my little family sit
down to dinner.  There was my majesty the prince and lord of the whole
island; I had the lives of all my subjects at my absolute command; I
could hang, draw, give liberty, and take it away, and no rebels among all
my subjects.  Then, to see how like a king I dined, too, all alone,
attended by my servants!  Poll, as if he had been my favourite, was the
only person permitted to talk to me.  My dog, who was now grown old and
crazy, and had found no species to multiply his kind upon, sat always at
my right hand; and two cats, one on one side of the table and one on the
other, expecting now and then a bit from my hand, as a mark of especial
favour.

But these were not the two cats which I brought on shore at first, for
they were both of them dead, and had been interred near my habitation by
my own hand; but one of them having multiplied by I know not what kind of
creature, these were two which I had preserved tame; whereas the rest ran
wild in the woods, and became indeed troublesome to me at last, for they
would often come into my house, and plunder me too, till at last I was
obliged to shoot them, and did kill a great many; at length they left me.
With this attendance and in this plentiful manner I lived; neither could
I be said to want anything but society; and of that, some time after
this, I was likely to have too much.

I was something impatient, as I have observed, to have the use of my
boat, though very loath to run any more hazards; and therefore sometimes
I sat contriving ways to get her about the island, and at other times I
sat myself down contented enough without her.  But I had a strange
uneasiness in my mind to go down to the point of the island where, as I
have said in my last ramble, I went up the hill to see how the shore lay,
and how the current set, that I might see what I had to do: this
inclination increased upon me every day, and at length I resolved to
travel thither by land, following the edge of the shore.  I did so; but
had any one in England met such a man as I was, it must either have
frightened him, or raised a great deal of laughter; and as I frequently
stood still to look at myself, I could not but smile at the notion of my
travelling through Yorkshire with such an equipage, and in such a dress.
Be pleased to take a sketch of my figure, as follows.

I had a great high shapeless cap, made of a goat’s skin, with a flap
hanging down behind, as well to keep the sun from me as to shoot the rain
off from running into my neck, nothing being so hurtful in these climates
as the rain upon the flesh under the clothes.

I had a short jacket of goat’s skin, the skirts coming down to about the
middle of the thighs, and a pair of open-kneed breeches of the same; the
breeches were made of the skin of an old he-goat, whose hair hung down
such a length on either side that, like pantaloons, it reached to the
middle of my legs; stockings and shoes I had none, but had made me a pair
of somethings, I scarce knew what to call them, like buskins, to flap
over my legs, and lace on either side like spatterdashes, but of a most
barbarous shape, as indeed were all the rest of my clothes.

I had on a broad belt of goat’s skin dried, which I drew together with
two thongs of the same instead of buckles, and in a kind of a frog on
either side of this, instead of a sword and dagger, hung a little saw and
a hatchet, one on one side and one on the other.  I had another belt not
so broad, and fastened in the same manner, which hung over my shoulder,
and at the end of it, under my left arm, hung two pouches, both made of
goat’s skin too, in one of which hung my powder, in the other my shot.
At my back I carried my basket, and on my shoulder my gun, and over my
head a great clumsy, ugly, goat’s-skin umbrella, but which, after all,
was the most necessary thing I had about me next to my gun.  As for my
face, the colour of it was really not so mulatto-like as one might expect
from a man not at all careful of it, and living within nine or ten
degrees of the equinox.  My beard I had once suffered to grow till it was
about a quarter of a yard long; but as I had both scissors and razors
sufficient, I had cut it pretty short, except what grew on my upper lip,
which I had trimmed into a large pair of Mahometan whiskers, such as I
had seen worn by some Turks at Sallee, for the Moors did not wear such,
though the Turks did; of these moustachios, or whiskers, I will not say
they were long enough to hang my hat upon them, but they were of a length
and shape monstrous enough, and such as in England would have passed for
frightful.

But all this is by-the-bye; for as to my figure, I had so few to observe
me that it was of no manner of consequence, so I say no more of that.  In
this kind of dress I went my new journey, and was out five or six days.
I travelled first along the sea-shore, directly to the place where I
first brought my boat to an anchor to get upon the rocks; and having no
boat now to take care of, I went over the land a nearer way to the same
height that I was upon before, when, looking forward to the points of the
rocks which lay out, and which I was obliged to double with my boat, as
is said above, I was surprised to see the sea all smooth and quiet—no
rippling, no motion, no current, any more there than in other places.  I
was at a strange loss to understand this, and resolved to spend some time
in the observing it, to see if nothing from the sets of the tide had
occasioned it; but I was presently convinced how it was—viz. that the
tide of ebb setting from the west, and joining with the current of waters
from some great river on the shore, must be the occasion of this current,
and that, according as the wind blew more forcibly from the west or from
the north, this current came nearer or went farther from the shore; for,
waiting thereabouts till evening, I went up to the rock again, and then
the tide of ebb being made, I plainly saw the current again as before,
only that it ran farther off, being near half a league from the shore,
whereas in my case it set close upon the shore, and hurried me and my
canoe along with it, which at another time it would not have done.

This observation convinced me that I had nothing to do but to observe the
ebbing and the flowing of the tide, and I might very easily bring my boat
about the island again; but when I began to think of putting it in
practice, I had such terror upon my spirits at the remembrance of the
danger I had been in, that I could not think of it again with any
patience, but, on the contrary, I took up another resolution, which was
more safe, though more laborious—and this was, that I would build, or
rather make, me another periagua or canoe, and so have one for one side
of the island, and one for the other.

You are to understand that now I had, as I may call it, two plantations
in the island—one my little fortification or tent, with the wall about
it, under the rock, with the cave behind me, which by this time I had
enlarged into several apartments or caves, one within another.  One of
these, which was the driest and largest, and had a door out beyond my
wall or fortification—that is to say, beyond where my wall joined to the
rock—was all filled up with the large earthen pots of which I have given
an account, and with fourteen or fifteen great baskets, which would hold
five or six bushels each, where I laid up my stores of provisions,
especially my corn, some in the ear, cut off short from the straw, and
the other rubbed out with my hand.

As for my wall, made, as before, with long stakes or piles, those piles
grew all like trees, and were by this time grown so big, and spread so
very much, that there was not the least appearance, to any one’s view, of
any habitation behind them.

Near this dwelling of mine, but a little farther within the land, and
upon lower ground, lay my two pieces of corn land, which I kept duly
cultivated and sowed, and which duly yielded me their harvest in its
season; and whenever I had occasion for more corn, I had more land
adjoining as fit as that.

Besides this, I had my country seat, and I had now a tolerable plantation
there also; for, first, I had my little bower, as I called it, which I
kept in repair—that is to say, I kept the hedge which encircled it in
constantly fitted up to its usual height, the ladder standing always in
the inside.  I kept the trees, which at first were no more than stakes,
but were now grown very firm and tall, always cut, so that they might
spread and grow thick and wild, and make the more agreeable shade, which
they did effectually to my mind.  In the middle of this I had my tent
always standing, being a piece of a sail spread over poles, set up for
that purpose, and which never wanted any repair or renewing; and under
this I had made me a squab or couch with the skins of the creatures I had
killed, and with other soft things, and a blanket laid on them, such as
belonged to our sea-bedding, which I had saved; and a great watch-coat to
cover me.  And here, whenever I had occasion to be absent from my chief
seat, I took up my country habitation.

Adjoining to this I had my enclosures for my cattle, that is to say my
goats, and I had taken an inconceivable deal of pains to fence and
enclose this ground.  I was so anxious to see it kept entire, lest the
goats should break through, that I never left off till, with infinite
labour, I had stuck the outside of the hedge so full of small stakes, and
so near to one another, that it was rather a pale than a hedge, and there
was scarce room to put a hand through between them; which afterwards,
when those stakes grew, as they all did in the next rainy season, made
the enclosure strong like a wall, indeed stronger than any wall.

This will testify for me that I was not idle, and that I spared no pains
to bring to pass whatever appeared necessary for my comfortable support,
for I considered the keeping up a breed of tame creatures thus at my hand
would be a living magazine of flesh, milk, butter, and cheese for me as
long as I lived in the place, if it were to be forty years; and that
keeping them in my reach depended entirely upon my perfecting my
enclosures to such a degree that I might be sure of keeping them
together; which by this method, indeed, I so effectually secured, that
when these little stakes began to grow, I had planted them so very thick
that I was forced to pull some of them up again.

In this place also I had my grapes growing, which I principally depended
on for my winter store of raisins, and which I never failed to preserve
very carefully, as the best and most agreeable dainty of my whole diet;
and indeed they were not only agreeable, but medicinal, wholesome,
nourishing, and refreshing to the last degree.

As this was also about half-way between my other habitation and the place
where I had laid up my boat, I generally stayed and lay here in my way
thither, for I used frequently to visit my boat; and I kept all things
about or belonging to her in very good order.  Sometimes I went out in
her to divert myself, but no more hazardous voyages would I go, scarcely
ever above a stone’s cast or two from the shore, I was so apprehensive of
being hurried out of my knowledge again by the currents or winds, or any
other accident.  But now I come to a new scene of my life.

It happened one day, about noon, going towards my boat, I was exceedingly
surprised with the print of a man’s naked foot on the shore, which was
very plain to be seen on the sand.  I stood like one thunderstruck, or as
if I had seen an apparition.  I listened, I looked round me, but I could
hear nothing, nor see anything; I went up to a rising ground to look
farther; I went up the shore and down the shore, but it was all one; I
could see no other impression but that one.  I went to it again to see if
there were any more, and to observe if it might not be my fancy; but
there was no room for that, for there was exactly the print of a
foot—toes, heel, and every part of a foot.  How it came thither I knew
not, nor could I in the least imagine; but after innumerable fluttering
thoughts, like a man perfectly confused and out of myself, I came home to
my fortification, not feeling, as we say, the ground I went on, but
terrified to the last degree, looking behind me at every two or three
steps, mistaking every bush and tree, and fancying every stump at a
distance to be a man.  Nor is it possible to describe how many various
shapes my affrighted imagination represented things to me in, how many
wild ideas were found every moment in my fancy, and what strange,
unaccountable whimsies came into my thoughts by the way.

When I came to my castle (for so I think I called it ever after this), I
fled into it like one pursued.  Whether I went over by the ladder, as
first contrived, or went in at the hole in the rock, which I had called a
door, I cannot remember; no, nor could I remember the next morning, for
never frightened hare fled to cover, or fox to earth, with more terror of
mind than I to this retreat.

I slept none that night; the farther I was from the occasion of my
fright, the greater my apprehensions were, which is something contrary to
the nature of such things, and especially to the usual practice of all
creatures in fear; but I was so embarrassed with my own frightful ideas
of the thing, that I formed nothing but dismal imaginations to myself,
even though I was now a great way off.  Sometimes I fancied it must be
the devil, and reason joined in with me in this supposition, for how
should any other thing in human shape come into the place?  Where was the
vessel that brought them?  What marks were there of any other footstep?
And how was it possible a man should come there?  But then, to think that
Satan should take human shape upon him in such a place, where there could
be no manner of occasion for it, but to leave the print of his foot
behind him, and that even for no purpose too, for he could not be sure I
should see it—this was an amusement the other way.  I considered that the
devil might have found out abundance of other ways to have terrified me
than this of the single print of a foot; that as I lived quite on the
other side of the island, he would never have been so simple as to leave
a mark in a place where it was ten thousand to one whether I should ever
see it or not, and in the sand too, which the first surge of the sea,
upon a high wind, would have defaced entirely.  All this seemed
inconsistent with the thing itself and with all the notions we usually
entertain of the subtlety of the devil.

Abundance of such things as these assisted to argue me out of all
apprehensions of its being the devil; and I presently concluded then that
it must be some more dangerous creature—viz. that it must be some of the
savages of the mainland opposite who had wandered out to sea in their
canoes, and either driven by the currents or by contrary winds, had made
the island, and had been on shore, but were gone away again to sea; being
as loath, perhaps, to have stayed in this desolate island as I would have
been to have had them.

While these reflections were rolling in my mind, I was very thankful in
my thoughts that I was so happy as not to be thereabouts at that time, or
that they did not see my boat, by which they would have concluded that
some inhabitants had been in the place, and perhaps have searched farther
for me.  Then terrible thoughts racked my imagination about their having
found out my boat, and that there were people here; and that, if so, I
should certainly have them come again in greater numbers and devour me;
that if it should happen that they should not find me, yet they would
find my enclosure, destroy all my corn, and carry away all my flock of
tame goats, and I should perish at last for mere want.

Thus my fear banished all my religious hope, all that former confidence
in God, which was founded upon such wonderful experience as I had had of
His goodness; as if He that had fed me by miracle hitherto could not
preserve, by His power, the provision which He had made for me by His
goodness.  I reproached myself with my laziness, that would not sow any
more corn one year than would just serve me till the next season, as if
no accident could intervene to prevent my enjoying the crop that was upon
the ground; and this I thought so just a reproof, that I resolved for the
future to have two or three years’ corn beforehand; so that, whatever
might come, I might not perish for want of bread.

How strange a chequer-work of Providence is the life of man! and by what
secret different springs are the affections hurried about, as different
circumstances present!  To-day we love what to-morrow we hate; to-day we
seek what to-morrow we shun; to-day we desire what to-morrow we fear,
nay, even tremble at the apprehensions of.  This was exemplified in me,
at this time, in the most lively manner imaginable; for I, whose only
affliction was that I seemed banished from human society, that I was
alone, circumscribed by the boundless ocean, cut off from mankind, and
condemned to what I call silent life; that I was as one whom Heaven
thought not worthy to be numbered among the living, or to appear among
the rest of His creatures; that to have seen one of my own species would
have seemed to me a raising me from death to life, and the greatest
blessing that Heaven itself, next to the supreme blessing of salvation,
could bestow; I say, that I should now tremble at the very apprehensions
of seeing a man, and was ready to sink into the ground at but the shadow
or silent appearance of a man having set his foot in the island.

Such is the uneven state of human life; and it afforded me a great many
curious speculations afterwards, when I had a little recovered my first
surprise.  I considered that this was the station of life the infinitely
wise and good providence of God had determined for me; that as I could
not foresee what the ends of Divine wisdom might be in all this, so I was
not to dispute His sovereignty; who, as I was His creature, had an
undoubted right, by creation, to govern and dispose of me absolutely as
He thought fit; and who, as I was a creature that had offended Him, had
likewise a judicial right to condemn me to what punishment He thought
fit; and that it was my part to submit to bear His indignation, because I
had sinned against Him.  I then reflected, that as God, who was not only
righteous but omnipotent, had thought fit thus to punish and afflict me,
so He was able to deliver me: that if He did not think fit to do so, it
was my unquestioned duty to resign myself absolutely and entirely to His
will; and, on the other hand, it was my duty also to hope in Him, pray to
Him, and quietly to attend to the dictates and directions of His daily
providence.

These thoughts took me up many hours, days, nay, I may say weeks and
months: and one particular effect of my cogitations on this occasion I
cannot omit.  One morning early, lying in my bed, and filled with
thoughts about my danger from the appearances of savages, I found it
discomposed me very much; upon which these words of the Scripture came
into my thoughts, “Call upon Me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.”  Upon this, rising cheerfully out of my
bed, my heart was not only comforted, but I was guided and encouraged to
pray earnestly to God for deliverance: when I had done praying I took up
my Bible, and opening it to read, the first words that presented to me
were, “Wait on the Lord, and be of good cheer, and He shall strengthen
thy heart; wait, I say, on the Lord.”  It is impossible to express the
comfort this gave me.  In answer, I thankfully laid down the book, and
was no more sad, at least on that occasion.

In the middle of these cogitations, apprehensions, and reflections, it
came into my thoughts one day that all this might be a mere chimera of my
own, and that this foot might be the print of my own foot, when I came on
shore from my boat: this cheered me up a little, too, and I began to
persuade myself it was all a delusion; that it was nothing else but my
own foot; and why might I not come that way from the boat, as well as I
was going that way to the boat?  Again, I considered also that I could by
no means tell for certain where I had trod, and where I had not; and that
if, at last, this was only the print of my own foot, I had played the
part of those fools who try to make stories of spectres and apparitions,
and then are frightened at them more than anybody.

Now I began to take courage, and to peep abroad again, for I had not
stirred out of my castle for three days and nights, so that I began to
starve for provisions; for I had little or nothing within doors but some
barley-cakes and water; then I knew that my goats wanted to be milked
too, which usually was my evening diversion: and the poor creatures were
in great pain and inconvenience for want of it; and, indeed, it almost
spoiled some of them, and almost dried up their milk.  Encouraging
myself, therefore, with the belief that this was nothing but the print of
one of my own feet, and that I might be truly said to start at my own
shadow, I began to go abroad again, and went to my country house to milk
my flock: but to see with what fear I went forward, how often I looked
behind me, how I was ready every now and then to lay down my basket and
run for my life, it would have made any one have thought I was haunted
with an evil conscience, or that I had been lately most terribly
frightened; and so, indeed, I had.  However, I went down thus two or
three days, and having seen nothing, I began to be a little bolder, and
to think there was really nothing in it but my own imagination; but I
could not persuade myself fully of this till I should go down to the
shore again, and see this print of a foot, and measure it by my own, and
see if there was any similitude or fitness, that I might be assured it
was my own foot: but when I came to the place, first, it appeared
evidently to me, that when I laid up my boat I could not possibly be on
shore anywhere thereabouts; secondly, when I came to measure the mark
with my own foot, I found my foot not so large by a great deal.  Both
these things filled my head with new imaginations, and gave me the
vapours again to the highest degree, so that I shook with cold like one
in an ague; and I went home again, filled with the belief that some man
or men had been on shore there; or, in short, that the island was
inhabited, and I might be surprised before I was aware; and what course
to take for my security I knew not.

Oh, what ridiculous resolutions men take when possessed with fear!  It
deprives them of the use of those means which reason offers for their
relief.  The first thing I proposed to myself was, to throw down my
enclosures, and turn all my tame cattle wild into the woods, lest the
enemy should find them, and then frequent the island in prospect of the
same or the like booty: then the simple thing of digging up my two
corn-fields, lest they should find such a grain there, and still be
prompted to frequent the island: then to demolish my bower and tent, that
they might not see any vestiges of habitation, and be prompted to look
farther, in order to find out the persons inhabiting.

These were the subject of the first night’s cogitations after I was come
home again, while the apprehensions which had so overrun my mind were
fresh upon me, and my head was full of vapours.  Thus, fear of danger is
ten thousand times more terrifying than danger itself, when apparent to
the eyes; and we find the burden of anxiety greater, by much, than the
evil which we are anxious about: and what was worse than all this, I had
not that relief in this trouble that from the resignation I used to
practise I hoped to have.  I looked, I thought, like Saul, who complained
not only that the Philistines were upon him, but that God had forsaken
him; for I did not now take due ways to compose my mind, by crying to God
in my distress, and resting upon His providence, as I had done before,
for my defence and deliverance; which, if I had done, I had at least been
more cheerfully supported under this new surprise, and perhaps carried
through it with more resolution.

This confusion of my thoughts kept me awake all night; but in the morning
I fell asleep; and having, by the amusement of my mind, been as it were
tired, and my spirits exhausted, I slept very soundly, and waked much
better composed than I had ever been before.  And now I began to think
sedately; and, upon debate with myself, I concluded that this island
(which was so exceedingly pleasant, fruitful, and no farther from the
mainland than as I had seen) was not so entirely abandoned as I might
imagine; that although there were no stated inhabitants who lived on the
spot, yet that there might sometimes come boats off from the shore, who,
either with design, or perhaps never but when they were driven by cross
winds, might come to this place; that I had lived there fifteen years now
and had not met with the least shadow or figure of any people yet; and
that, if at any time they should be driven here, it was probable they
went away again as soon as ever they could, seeing they had never thought
fit to fix here upon any occasion; that the most I could suggest any
danger from was from any casual accidental landing of straggling people
from the main, who, as it was likely, if they were driven hither, were
here against their wills, so they made no stay here, but went off again
with all possible speed; seldom staying one night on shore, lest they
should not have the help of the tides and daylight back again; and that,
therefore, I had nothing to do but to consider of some safe retreat, in
case I should see any savages land upon the spot.

Now, I began sorely to repent that I had dug my cave so large as to bring
a door through again, which door, as I said, came out beyond where my
fortification joined to the rock: upon maturely considering this,
therefore, I resolved to draw me a second fortification, in the manner of
a semicircle, at a distance from my wall, just where I had planted a
double row of trees about twelve years before, of which I made mention:
these trees having been planted so thick before, they wanted but few
piles to be driven between them, that they might be thicker and stronger,
and my wall would be soon finished.  So that I had now a double wall; and
my outer wall was thickened with pieces of timber, old cables, and
everything I could think of, to make it strong; having in it seven little
holes, about as big as I might put my arm out at.  In the inside of this
I thickened my wall to about ten feet thick with continually bringing
earth out of my cave, and laying it at the foot of the wall, and walking
upon it; and through the seven holes I contrived to plant the muskets, of
which I took notice that I had got seven on shore out of the ship; these
I planted like my cannon, and fitted them into frames, that held them
like a carriage, so that I could fire all the seven guns in two minutes’
time; this wall I was many a weary month in finishing, and yet never
thought myself safe till it was done.

When this was done I stuck all the ground without my wall, for a great
length every way, as full with stakes or sticks of the osier-like wood,
which I found so apt to grow, as they could well stand; insomuch that I
believe I might set in near twenty thousand of them, leaving a pretty
large space between them and my wall, that I might have room to see an
enemy, and they might have no shelter from the young trees, if they
attempted to approach my outer wall.

Thus in two years’ time I had a thick grove; and in five or six years’
time I had a wood before my dwelling, growing so monstrously thick and
strong that it was indeed perfectly impassable: and no men, of what kind
soever, could ever imagine that there was anything beyond it, much less a
habitation.  As for the way which I proposed to myself to go in and out
(for I left no avenue), it was by setting two ladders, one to a part of
the rock which was low, and then broke in, and left room to place another
ladder upon that; so when the two ladders were taken down no man living
could come down to me without doing himself mischief; and if they had
come down, they were still on the outside of my outer wall.

Thus I took all the measures human prudence could suggest for my own
preservation; and it will be seen at length that they were not altogether
without just reason; though I foresaw nothing at that time more than my
mere fear suggested to me.




CHAPTER XII—A CAVE RETREAT


While this was doing, I was not altogether careless of my other affairs;
for I had a great concern upon me for my little herd of goats: they were
not only a ready supply to me on every occasion, and began to be
sufficient for me, without the expense of powder and shot, but also
without the fatigue of hunting after the wild ones; and I was loath to
lose the advantage of them, and to have them all to nurse up over again.

For this purpose, after long consideration, I could think of but two ways
to preserve them: one was, to find another convenient place to dig a cave
underground, and to drive them into it every night; and the other was to
enclose two or three little bits of land, remote from one another, and as
much concealed as I could, where I might keep about half-a-dozen young
goats in each place; so that if any disaster happened to the flock in
general, I might be able to raise them again with little trouble and
time: and this though it would require a good deal of time and labour, I
thought was the most rational design.

Accordingly, I spent some time to find out the most retired parts of the
island; and I pitched upon one, which was as private, indeed, as my heart
could wish: it was a little damp piece of ground in the middle of the
hollow and thick woods, where, as is observed, I almost lost myself once
before, endeavouring to come back that way from the eastern part of the
island.  Here I found a clear piece of land, near three acres, so
surrounded with woods that it was almost an enclosure by nature; at
least, it did not want near so much labour to make it so as the other
piece of ground I had worked so hard at.

I immediately went to work with this piece of ground; and in less than a
month’s time I had so fenced it round that my flock, or herd, call it
which you please, which were not so wild now as at first they might be
supposed to be, were well enough secured in it: so, without any further
delay, I removed ten young she-goats and two he-goats to this piece, and
when they were there I continued to perfect the fence till I had made it
as secure as the other; which, however, I did at more leisure, and it
took me up more time by a great deal.  All this labour I was at the
expense of, purely from my apprehensions on account of the print of a
man’s foot; for as yet I had never seen any human creature come near the
island; and I had now lived two years under this uneasiness, which,
indeed, made my life much less comfortable than it was before, as may be
well imagined by any who know what it is to live in the constant snare of
the fear of man.  And this I must observe, with grief, too, that the
discomposure of my mind had great impression also upon the religious part
of my thoughts; for the dread and terror of falling into the hands of
savages and cannibals lay so upon my spirits, that I seldom found myself
in a due temper for application to my Maker; at least, not with the
sedate calmness and resignation of soul which I was wont to do: I rather
prayed to God as under great affliction and pressure of mind, surrounded
with danger, and in expectation every night of being murdered and
devoured before morning; and I must testify, from my experience, that a
temper of peace, thankfulness, love, and affection, is much the more
proper frame for prayer than that of terror and discomposure: and that
under the dread of mischief impending, a man is no more fit for a
comforting performance of the duty of praying to God than he is for a
repentance on a sick-bed; for these discomposures affect the mind, as the
others do the body; and the discomposure of the mind must necessarily be
as great a disability as that of the body, and much greater; praying to
God being properly an act of the mind, not of the body.

But to go on.  After I had thus secured one part of my little living
stock, I went about the whole island, searching for another private place
to make such another deposit; when, wandering more to the west point of
the island than I had ever done yet, and looking out to sea, I thought I
saw a boat upon the sea, at a great distance.  I had found a perspective
glass or two in one of the seamen’s chests, which I saved out of our
ship, but I had it not about me; and this was so remote that I could not
tell what to make of it, though I looked at it till my eyes were not able
to hold to look any longer; whether it was a boat or not I do not know,
but as I descended from the hill I could see no more of it, so I gave it
over; only I resolved to go no more out without a perspective glass in my
pocket.  When I was come down the hill to the end of the island, where,
indeed, I had never been before, I was presently convinced that the
seeing the print of a man’s foot was not such a strange thing in the
island as I imagined: and but that it was a special providence that I was
cast upon the side of the island where the savages never came, I should
easily have known that nothing was more frequent than for the canoes from
the main, when they happened to be a little too far out at sea, to shoot
over to that side of the island for harbour: likewise, as they often met
and fought in their canoes, the victors, having taken any prisoners,
would bring them over to this shore, where, according to their dreadful
customs, being all cannibals, they would kill and eat them; of which
hereafter.

When I was come down the hill to the shore, as I said above, being the
SW. point of the island, I was perfectly confounded and amazed; nor is it
possible for me to express the horror of my mind at seeing the shore
spread with skulls, hands, feet, and other bones of human bodies; and
particularly I observed a place where there had been a fire made, and a
circle dug in the earth, like a cockpit, where I supposed the savage
wretches had sat down to their human feastings upon the bodies of their
fellow-creatures.

I was so astonished with the sight of these things, that I entertained no
notions of any danger to myself from it for a long while: all my
apprehensions were buried in the thoughts of such a pitch of inhuman,
hellish brutality, and the horror of the degeneracy of human nature,
which, though I had heard of it often, yet I never had so near a view of
before; in short, I turned away my face from the horrid spectacle; my
stomach grew sick, and I was just at the point of fainting, when nature
discharged the disorder from my stomach; and having vomited with uncommon
violence, I was a little relieved, but could not bear to stay in the
place a moment; so I got up the hill again with all the speed I could,
and walked on towards my own habitation.

When I came a little out of that part of the island I stood still awhile,
as amazed, and then, recovering myself, I looked up with the utmost
affection of my soul, and, with a flood of tears in my eyes, gave God
thanks, that had cast my first lot in a part of the world where I was
distinguished from such dreadful creatures as these; and that, though I
had esteemed my present condition very miserable, had yet given me so
many comforts in it that I had still more to give thanks for than to
complain of: and this, above all, that I had, even in this miserable
condition, been comforted with the knowledge of Himself, and the hope of
His blessing: which was a felicity more than sufficiently equivalent to
all the misery which I had suffered, or could suffer.

In this frame of thankfulness I went home to my castle, and began to be
much easier now, as to the safety of my circumstances, than ever I was
before: for I observed that these wretches never came to this island in
search of what they could get; perhaps not seeking, not wanting, or not
expecting anything here; and having often, no doubt, been up the covered,
woody part of it without finding anything to their purpose.  I knew I had
been here now almost eighteen years, and never saw the least footsteps of
human creature there before; and I might be eighteen years more as
entirely concealed as I was now, if I did not discover myself to them,
which I had no manner of occasion to do; it being my only business to
keep myself entirely concealed where I was, unless I found a better sort
of creatures than cannibals to make myself known to.  Yet I entertained
such an abhorrence of the savage wretches that I have been speaking of,
and of the wretched, inhuman custom of their devouring and eating one
another up, that I continued pensive and sad, and kept close within my
own circle for almost two years after this: when I say my own circle, I
mean by it my three plantations—viz. my castle, my country seat (which I
called my bower), and my enclosure in the woods: nor did I look after
this for any other use than an enclosure for my goats; for the aversion
which nature gave me to these hellish wretches was such, that I was as
fearful of seeing them as of seeing the devil himself.  I did not so much
as go to look after my boat all this time, but began rather to think of
making another; for I could not think of ever making any more attempts to
bring the other boat round the island to me, lest I should meet with some
of these creatures at sea; in which case, if I had happened to have
fallen into their hands, I knew what would have been my lot.

Time, however, and the satisfaction I had that I was in no danger of
being discovered by these people, began to wear off my uneasiness about
them; and I began to live just in the same composed manner as before,
only with this difference, that I used more caution, and kept my eyes
more about me than I did before, lest I should happen to be seen by any
of them; and particularly, I was more cautious of firing my gun, lest any
of them, being on the island, should happen to hear it.  It was,
therefore, a very good providence to me that I had furnished myself with
a tame breed of goats, and that I had no need to hunt any more about the
woods, or shoot at them; and if I did catch any of them after this, it
was by traps and snares, as I had done before; so that for two years
after this I believe I never fired my gun once off, though I never went
out without it; and what was more, as I had saved three pistols out of
the ship, I always carried them out with me, or at least two of them,
sticking them in my goat-skin belt.  I also furbished up one of the great
cutlasses that I had out of the ship, and made me a belt to hang it on
also; so that I was now a most formidable fellow to look at when I went
abroad, if you add to the former description of myself the particular of
two pistols, and a broadsword hanging at my side in a belt, but without a
scabbard.

Things going on thus, as I have said, for some time, I seemed, excepting
these cautions, to be reduced to my former calm, sedate way of living.
All these things tended to show me more and more how far my condition was
from being miserable, compared to some others; nay, to many other
particulars of life which it might have pleased God to have made my lot.
It put me upon reflecting how little repining there would be among
mankind at any condition of life if people would rather compare their
condition with those that were worse, in order to be thankful, than be
always comparing them with those which are better, to assist their
murmurings and complainings.

As in my present condition there were not really many things which I
wanted, so indeed I thought that the frights I had been in about these
savage wretches, and the concern I had been in for my own preservation,
had taken off the edge of my invention, for my own conveniences; and I
had dropped a good design, which I had once bent my thoughts upon, and
that was to try if I could not make some of my barley into malt, and then
try to brew myself some beer.  This was really a whimsical thought, and I
reproved myself often for the simplicity of it: for I presently saw there
would be the want of several things necessary to the making my beer that
it would be impossible for me to supply; as, first, casks to preserve it
in, which was a thing that, as I have observed already, I could never
compass: no, though I spent not only many days, but weeks, nay months, in
attempting it, but to no purpose.  In the next place, I had no hops to
make it keep, no yeast to make it work, no copper or kettle to make it
boil; and yet with all these things wanting, I verily believe, had not
the frights and terrors I was in about the savages intervened, I had
undertaken it, and perhaps brought it to pass too; for I seldom gave
anything over without accomplishing it, when once I had it in my head to
began it.  But my invention now ran quite another way; for night and day
I could think of nothing but how I might destroy some of the monsters in
their cruel, bloody entertainment, and if possible save the victim they
should bring hither to destroy.  It would take up a larger volume than
this whole work is intended to be to set down all the contrivances I
hatched, or rather brooded upon, in my thoughts, for the destroying these
creatures, or at least frightening them so as to prevent their coming
hither any more: but all this was abortive; nothing could be possible to
take effect, unless I was to be there to do it myself: and what could one
man do among them, when perhaps there might be twenty or thirty of them
together with their darts, or their bows and arrows, with which they
could shoot as true to a mark as I could with my gun?

Sometimes I thought if digging a hole under the place where they made
their fire, and putting in five or six pounds of gunpowder, which, when
they kindled their fire, would consequently take fire, and blow up all
that was near it: but as, in the first place, I should be unwilling to
waste so much powder upon them, my store being now within the quantity of
one barrel, so neither could I be sure of its going off at any certain
time, when it might surprise them; and, at best, that it would do little
more than just blow the fire about their ears and fright them, but not
sufficient to make them forsake the place: so I laid it aside; and then
proposed that I would place myself in ambush in some convenient place,
with my three guns all double-loaded, and in the middle of their bloody
ceremony let fly at them, when I should be sure to kill or wound perhaps
two or three at every shot; and then falling in upon them with my three
pistols and my sword, I made no doubt but that, if there were twenty, I
should kill them all.  This fancy pleased my thoughts for some weeks, and
I was so full of it that I often dreamed of it, and, sometimes, that I
was just going to let fly at them in my sleep.  I went so far with it in
my imagination that I employed myself several days to find out proper
places to put myself in ambuscade, as I said, to watch for them, and I
went frequently to the place itself, which was now grown more familiar to
me; but while my mind was thus filled with thoughts of revenge and a
bloody putting twenty or thirty of them to the sword, as I may call it,
the horror I had at the place, and at the signals of the barbarous
wretches devouring one another, abetted my malice.  Well, at length I
found a place in the side of the hill where I was satisfied I might
securely wait till I saw any of their boats coming; and might then, even
before they would be ready to come on shore, convey myself unseen into
some thickets of trees, in one of which there was a hollow large enough
to conceal me entirely; and there I might sit and observe all their
bloody doings, and take my full aim at their heads, when they were so
close together as that it would be next to impossible that I should miss
my shot, or that I could fail wounding three or four of them at the first
shot.  In this place, then, I resolved to fulfil my design; and
accordingly I prepared two muskets and my ordinary fowling-piece.  The
two muskets I loaded with a brace of slugs each, and four or five smaller
bullets, about the size of pistol bullets; and the fowling-piece I loaded
with near a handful of swan-shot of the largest size; I also loaded my
pistols with about four bullets each; and, in this posture, well provided
with ammunition for a second and third charge, I prepared myself for my
expedition.

After I had thus laid the scheme of my design, and in my imagination put
it in practice, I continually made my tour every morning to the top of
the hill, which was from my castle, as I called it, about three miles or
more, to see if I could observe any boats upon the sea, coming near the
island, or standing over towards it; but I began to tire of this hard
duty, after I had for two or three months constantly kept my watch, but
came always back without any discovery; there having not, in all that
time, been the least appearance, not only on or near the shore, but on
the whole ocean, so far as my eye or glass could reach every way.

As long as I kept my daily tour to the hill, to look out, so long also I
kept up the vigour of my design, and my spirits seemed to be all the
while in a suitable frame for so outrageous an execution as the killing
twenty or thirty naked savages, for an offence which I had not at all
entered into any discussion of in my thoughts, any farther than my
passions were at first fired by the horror I conceived at the unnatural
custom of the people of that country, who, it seems, had been suffered by
Providence, in His wise disposition of the world, to have no other guide
than that of their own abominable and vitiated passions; and consequently
were left, and perhaps had been so for some ages, to act such horrid
things, and receive such dreadful customs, as nothing but nature,
entirely abandoned by Heaven, and actuated by some hellish degeneracy,
could have run them into.  But now, when, as I have said, I began to be
weary of the fruitless excursion which I had made so long and so far
every morning in vain, so my opinion of the action itself began to alter;
and I began, with cooler and calmer thoughts, to consider what I was
going to engage in; what authority or call I had to pretend to be judge
and executioner upon these men as criminals, whom Heaven had thought fit
for so many ages to suffer unpunished to go on, and to be as it were the
executioners of His judgments one upon another; how far these people were
offenders against me, and what right I had to engage in the quarrel of
that blood which they shed promiscuously upon one another.  I debated
this very often with myself thus: “How do I know what God Himself judges
in this particular case?  It is certain these people do not commit this
as a crime; it is not against their own consciences reproving, or their
light reproaching them; they do not know it to be an offence, and then
commit it in defiance of divine justice, as we do in almost all the sins
we commit.  They think it no more a crime to kill a captive taken in war
than we do to kill an ox; or to eat human flesh than we do to eat
mutton.”

When I considered this a little, it followed necessarily that I was
certainly in the wrong; that these people were not murderers, in the
sense that I had before condemned them in my thoughts, any more than
those Christians were murderers who often put to death the prisoners
taken in battle; or more frequently, upon many occasions, put whole
troops of men to the sword, without giving quarter, though they threw
down their arms and submitted.  In the next place, it occurred to me that
although the usage they gave one another was thus brutish and inhuman,
yet it was really nothing to me: these people had done me no injury: that
if they attempted, or I saw it necessary, for my immediate preservation,
to fall upon them, something might be said for it: but that I was yet out
of their power, and they really had no knowledge of me, and consequently
no design upon me; and therefore it could not be just for me to fall upon
them; that this would justify the conduct of the Spaniards in all their
barbarities practised in America, where they destroyed millions of these
people; who, however they were idolators and barbarians, and had several
bloody and barbarous rites in their customs, such as sacrificing human
bodies to their idols, were yet, as to the Spaniards, very innocent
people; and that the rooting them out of the country is spoken of with
the utmost abhorrence and detestation by even the Spaniards themselves at
this time, and by all other Christian nations of Europe, as a mere
butchery, a bloody and unnatural piece of cruelty, unjustifiable either
to God or man; and for which the very name of a Spaniard is reckoned to
be frightful and terrible, to all people of humanity or of Christian
compassion; as if the kingdom of Spain were particularly eminent for the
produce of a race of men who were without principles of tenderness, or
the common bowels of pity to the miserable, which is reckoned to be a
mark of generous temper in the mind.

These considerations really put me to a pause, and to a kind of a full
stop; and I began by little and little to be off my design, and to
conclude I had taken wrong measures in my resolution to attack the
savages; and that it was not my business to meddle with them, unless they
first attacked me; and this it was my business, if possible, to prevent:
but that, if I were discovered and attacked by them, I knew my duty.  On
the other hand, I argued with myself that this really was the way not to
deliver myself, but entirely to ruin and destroy myself; for unless I was
sure to kill every one that not only should be on shore at that time, but
that should ever come on shore afterwards, if but one of them escaped to
tell their country-people what had happened, they would come over again
by thousands to revenge the death of their fellows, and I should only
bring upon myself a certain destruction, which, at present, I had no
manner of occasion for.  Upon the whole, I concluded that I ought,
neither in principle nor in policy, one way or other, to concern myself
in this affair: that my business was, by all possible means to conceal
myself from them, and not to leave the least sign for them to guess by
that there were any living creatures upon the island—I mean of human
shape.  Religion joined in with this prudential resolution; and I was
convinced now, many ways, that I was perfectly out of my duty when I was
laying all my bloody schemes for the destruction of innocent creatures—I
mean innocent as to me.  As to the crimes they were guilty of towards one
another, I had nothing to do with them; they were national, and I ought
to leave them to the justice of God, who is the Governor of nations, and
knows how, by national punishments, to make a just retribution for
national offences, and to bring public judgments upon those who offend in
a public manner, by such ways as best please Him.  This appeared so clear
to me now, that nothing was a greater satisfaction to me than that I had
not been suffered to do a thing which I now saw so much reason to believe
would have been no less a sin than that of wilful murder if I had
committed it; and I gave most humble thanks on my knees to God, that He
had thus delivered me from blood-guiltiness; beseeching Him to grant me
the protection of His providence, that I might not fall into the hands of
the barbarians, or that I might not lay my hands upon them, unless I had
a more clear call from Heaven to do it, in defence of my own life.

In this disposition I continued for near a year after this; and so far
was I from desiring an occasion for falling upon these wretches, that in
all that time I never once went up the hill to see whether there were any
of them in sight, or to know whether any of them had been on shore there
or not, that I might not be tempted to renew any of my contrivances
against them, or be provoked by any advantage that might present itself
to fall upon them; only this I did: I went and removed my boat, which I
had on the other side of the island, and carried it down to the east end
of the whole island, where I ran it into a little cove, which I found
under some high rocks, and where I knew, by reason of the currents, the
savages durst not, at least would not, come with their boats upon any
account whatever.  With my boat I carried away everything that I had left
there belonging to her, though not necessary for the bare going
thither—viz. a mast and sail which I had made for her, and a thing like
an anchor, but which, indeed, could not be called either anchor or
grapnel; however, it was the best I could make of its kind: all these I
removed, that there might not be the least shadow for discovery, or
appearance of any boat, or of any human habitation upon the island.
Besides this, I kept myself, as I said, more retired than ever, and
seldom went from my cell except upon my constant employment, to milk my
she-goats, and manage my little flock in the wood, which, as it was quite
on the other part of the island, was out of danger; for certain, it is
that these savage people, who sometimes haunted this island, never came
with any thoughts of finding anything here, and consequently never
wandered off from the coast, and I doubt not but they might have been
several times on shore after my apprehensions of them had made me
cautious, as well as before.  Indeed, I looked back with some horror upon
the thoughts of what my condition would have been if I had chopped upon
them and been discovered before that; when, naked and unarmed, except
with one gun, and that loaded often only with small shot, I walked
everywhere, peeping and peering about the island, to see what I could
get; what a surprise should I have been in if, when I discovered the
print of a man’s foot, I had, instead of that, seen fifteen or twenty
savages, and found them pursuing me, and by the swiftness of their
running no possibility of my escaping them!  The thoughts of this
sometimes sank my very soul within me, and distressed my mind so much
that I could not soon recover it, to think what I should have done, and
how I should not only have been unable to resist them, but even should
not have had presence of mind enough to do what I might have done; much
less what now, after so much consideration and preparation, I might be
able to do.  Indeed, after serious thinking of these things, I would be
melancholy, and sometimes it would last a great while; but I resolved it
all at last into thankfulness to that Providence which had delivered me
from so many unseen dangers, and had kept me from those mischiefs which I
could have no way been the agent in delivering myself from, because I had
not the least notion of any such thing depending, or the least
supposition of its being possible.  This renewed a contemplation which
often had come into my thoughts in former times, when first I began to
see the merciful dispositions of Heaven, in the dangers we run through in
this life; how wonderfully we are delivered when we know nothing of it;
how, when we are in a quandary as we call it, a doubt or hesitation
whether to go this way or that way, a secret hint shall direct us this
way, when we intended to go that way: nay, when sense, our own
inclination, and perhaps business has called us to go the other way, yet
a strange impression upon the mind, from we know not what springs, and by
we know not what power, shall overrule us to go this way; and it shall
afterwards appear that had we gone that way, which we should have gone,
and even to our imagination ought to have gone, we should have been
ruined and lost.  Upon these and many like reflections I afterwards made
it a certain rule with me, that whenever I found those secret hints or
pressings of mind to doing or not doing anything that presented, or going
this way or that way, I never failed to obey the secret dictate; though I
knew no other reason for it than such a pressure or such a hint hung upon
my mind.  I could give many examples of the success of this conduct in
the course of my life, but more especially in the latter part of my
inhabiting this unhappy island; besides many occasions which it is very
likely I might have taken notice of, if I had seen with the same eyes
then that I see with now.  But it is never too late to be wise; and I
cannot but advise all considering men, whose lives are attended with such
extraordinary incidents as mine, or even though not so extraordinary, not
to slight such secret intimations of Providence, let them come from what
invisible intelligence they will.  That I shall not discuss, and perhaps
cannot account for; but certainly they are a proof of the converse of
spirits, and a secret communication between those embodied and those
unembodied, and such a proof as can never be withstood; of which I shall
have occasion to give some remarkable instances in the remainder of my
solitary residence in this dismal place.

I believe the reader of this will not think it strange if I confess that
these anxieties, these constant dangers I lived in, and the concern that
was now upon me, put an end to all invention, and to all the contrivances
that I had laid for my future accommodations and conveniences.  I had the
care of my safety more now upon my hands than that of my food.  I cared
not to drive a nail, or chop a stick of wood now, for fear the noise I
might make should be heard: much less would I fire a gun for the same
reason: and above all I was intolerably uneasy at making any fire, lest
the smoke, which is visible at a great distance in the day, should betray
me.  For this reason, I removed that part of my business which required
fire, such as burning of pots and pipes, &c., into my new apartment in
the woods; where, after I had been some time, I found, to my unspeakable
consolation, a mere natural cave in the earth, which went in a vast way,
and where, I daresay, no savage, had he been at the mouth of it, would be
so hardy as to venture in; nor, indeed, would any man else, but one who,
like me, wanted nothing so much as a safe retreat.

The mouth of this hollow was at the bottom of a great rock, where, by
mere accident (I would say, if I did not see abundant reason to ascribe
all such things now to Providence), I was cutting down some thick
branches of trees to make charcoal; and before I go on I must observe the
reason of my making this charcoal, which was this—I was afraid of making
a smoke about my habitation, as I said before; and yet I could not live
there without baking my bread, cooking my meat, &c.; so I contrived to
burn some wood here, as I had seen done in England, under turf, till it
became chark or dry coal: and then putting the fire out, I preserved the
coal to carry home, and perform the other services for which fire was
wanting, without danger of smoke.  But this is by-the-bye.  While I was
cutting down some wood here, I perceived that, behind a very thick branch
of low brushwood or underwood, there was a kind of hollow place: I was
curious to look in it; and getting with difficulty into the mouth of it,
I found it was pretty large, that is to say, sufficient for me to stand
upright in it, and perhaps another with me: but I must confess to you
that I made more haste out than I did in, when looking farther into the
place, and which was perfectly dark, I saw two broad shining eyes of some
creature, whether devil or man I knew not, which twinkled like two stars;
the dim light from the cave’s mouth shining directly in, and making the
reflection.  However, after some pause I recovered myself, and began to
call myself a thousand fools, and to think that he that was afraid to see
the devil was not fit to live twenty years in an island all alone; and
that I might well think there was nothing in this cave that was more
frightful than myself.  Upon this, plucking up my courage, I took up a
firebrand, and in I rushed again, with the stick flaming in my hand: I
had not gone three steps in before I was almost as frightened as before;
for I heard a very loud sigh, like that of a man in some pain, and it was
followed by a broken noise, as of words half expressed, and then a deep
sigh again.  I stepped back, and was indeed struck with such a surprise
that it put me into a cold sweat, and if I had had a hat on my head, I
will not answer for it that my hair might not have lifted it off.  But
still plucking up my spirits as well as I could, and encouraging myself a
little with considering that the power and presence of God was
everywhere, and was able to protect me, I stepped forward again, and by
the light of the firebrand, holding it up a little over my head, I saw
lying on the ground a monstrous, frightful old he-goat, just making his
will, as we say, and gasping for life, and, dying, indeed, of mere old
age.  I stirred him a little to see if I could get him out, and he
essayed to get up, but was not able to raise himself; and I thought with
myself he might even lie there—for if he had frightened me, so he would
certainly fright any of the savages, if any of them should be so hardy as
to come in there while he had any life in him.

I was now recovered from my surprise, and began to look round me, when I
found the cave was but very small—that is to say, it might be about
twelve feet over, but in no manner of shape, neither round nor square, no
hands having ever been employed in making it but those of mere Nature.  I
observed also that there was a place at the farther side of it that went
in further, but was so low that it required me to creep upon my hands and
knees to go into it, and whither it went I knew not; so, having no
candle, I gave it over for that time, but resolved to go again the next
day provided with candles and a tinder-box, which I had made of the lock
of one of the muskets, with some wildfire in the pan.

Accordingly, the next day I came provided with six large candles of my
own making (for I made very good candles now of goat’s tallow, but was
hard set for candle-wick, using sometimes rags or rope-yarn, and
sometimes the dried rind of a weed like nettles); and going into this low
place I was obliged to creep upon all-fours as I have said, almost ten
yards—which, by the way, I thought was a venture bold enough, considering
that I knew not how far it might go, nor what was beyond it.  When I had
got through the strait, I found the roof rose higher up, I believe near
twenty feet; but never was such a glorious sight seen in the island, I
daresay, as it was to look round the sides and roof of this vault or
cave—the wall reflected a hundred thousand lights to me from my two
candles.  What it was in the rock—whether diamonds or any other precious
stones, or gold which I rather supposed it to be—I knew not.  The place I
was in was a most delightful cavity, or grotto, though perfectly dark;
the floor was dry and level, and had a sort of a small loose gravel upon
it, so that there was no nauseous or venomous creature to be seen,
neither was there any damp or wet on the sides or roof.  The only
difficulty in it was the entrance—which, however, as it was a place of
security, and such a retreat as I wanted; I thought was a convenience; so
that I was really rejoiced at the discovery, and resolved, without any
delay, to bring some of those things which I was most anxious about to
this place: particularly, I resolved to bring hither my magazine of
powder, and all my spare arms—viz. two fowling-pieces—for I had three in
all—and three muskets—for of them I had eight in all; so I kept in my
castle only five, which stood ready mounted like pieces of cannon on my
outmost fence, and were ready also to take out upon any expedition.  Upon
this occasion of removing my ammunition I happened to open the barrel of
powder which I took up out of the sea, and which had been wet, and I
found that the water had penetrated about three or four inches into the
powder on every side, which caking and growing hard, had preserved the
inside like a kernel in the shell, so that I had near sixty pounds of
very good powder in the centre of the cask.  This was a very agreeable
discovery to me at that time; so I carried all away thither, never
keeping above two or three pounds of powder with me in my castle, for
fear of a surprise of any kind; I also carried thither all the lead I had
left for bullets.

I fancied myself now like one of the ancient giants who were said to live
in caves and holes in the rocks, where none could come at them; for I
persuaded myself, while I was here, that if five hundred savages were to
hunt me, they could never find me out—or if they did, they would not
venture to attack me here.  The old goat whom I found expiring died in
the mouth of the cave the next day after I made this discovery; and I
found it much easier to dig a great hole there, and throw him in and
cover him with earth, than to drag him out; so I interred him there, to
prevent offence to my nose.




CHAPTER XIII—WRECK OF A SPANISH SHIP


I was now in the twenty-third year of my residence in this island, and
was so naturalised to the place and the manner of living, that, could I
but have enjoyed the certainty that no savages would come to the place to
disturb me, I could have been content to have capitulated for spending
the rest of my time there, even to the last moment, till I had laid me
down and died, like the old goat in the cave.  I had also arrived to some
little diversions and amusements, which made the time pass a great deal
more pleasantly with me than it did before—first, I had taught my Poll,
as I noted before, to speak; and he did it so familiarly, and talked so
articulately and plain, that it was very pleasant to me; and he lived
with me no less than six-and-twenty years.  How long he might have lived
afterwards I know not, though I know they have a notion in the Brazils
that they live a hundred years.  My dog was a pleasant and loving
companion to me for no less than sixteen years of my time, and then died
of mere old age.  As for my cats, they multiplied, as I have observed, to
that degree that I was obliged to shoot several of them at first, to keep
them from devouring me and all I had; but at length, when the two old
ones I brought with me were gone, and after some time continually driving
them from me, and letting them have no provision with me, they all ran
wild into the woods, except two or three favourites, which I kept tame,
and whose young, when they had any, I always drowned; and these were part
of my family.  Besides these I always kept two or three household kids
about me, whom I taught to feed out of my hand; and I had two more
parrots, which talked pretty well, and would all call “Robin Crusoe,” but
none like my first; nor, indeed, did I take the pains with any of them
that I had done with him.  I had also several tame sea-fowls, whose name
I knew not, that I caught upon the shore, and cut their wings; and the
little stakes which I had planted before my castle-wall being now grown
up to a good thick grove, these fowls all lived among these low trees,
and bred there, which was very agreeable to me; so that, as I said above,
I began to be very well contented with the life I led, if I could have
been secured from the dread of the savages.  But it was otherwise
directed; and it may not be amiss for all people who shall meet with my
story to make this just observation from it: How frequently, in the
course of our lives, the evil which in itself we seek most to shun, and
which, when we are fallen into, is the most dreadful to us, is oftentimes
the very means or door of our deliverance, by which alone we can be
raised again from the affliction we are fallen into.  I could give many
examples of this in the course of my unaccountable life; but in nothing
was it more particularly remarkable than in the circumstances of my last
years of solitary residence in this island.

It was now the month of December, as I said above, in my twenty-third
year; and this, being the southern solstice (for winter I cannot call
it), was the particular time of my harvest, and required me to be pretty
much abroad in the fields, when, going out early in the morning, even
before it was thorough daylight, I was surprised with seeing a light of
some fire upon the shore, at a distance from me of about two miles,
toward that part of the island where I had observed some savages had
been, as before, and not on the other side; but, to my great affliction,
it was on my side of the island.

I was indeed terribly surprised at the sight, and stopped short within my
grove, not daring to go out, lest I might be surprised; and yet I had no
more peace within, from the apprehensions I had that if these savages, in
rambling over the island, should find my corn standing or cut, or any of
my works or improvements, they would immediately conclude that there were
people in the place, and would then never rest till they had found me
out.  In this extremity I went back directly to my castle, pulled up the
ladder after me, and made all things without look as wild and natural as
I could.

Then I prepared myself within, putting myself in a posture of defence.  I
loaded all my cannon, as I called them—that is to say, my muskets, which
were mounted upon my new fortification—and all my pistols, and resolved
to defend myself to the last gasp—not forgetting seriously to commend
myself to the Divine protection, and earnestly to pray to God to deliver
me out of the hands of the barbarians.  I continued in this posture about
two hours, and began to be impatient for intelligence abroad, for I had
no spies to send out.  After sitting a while longer, and musing what I
should do in this case, I was not able to bear sitting in ignorance
longer; so setting up my ladder to the side of the hill, where there was
a flat place, as I observed before, and then pulling the ladder after me,
I set it up again and mounted the top of the hill, and pulling out my
perspective glass, which I had taken on purpose, I laid me down flat on
my belly on the ground, and began to look for the place.  I presently
found there were no less than nine naked savages sitting round a small
fire they had made, not to warm them, for they had no need of that, the
weather being extremely hot, but, as I supposed, to dress some of their
barbarous diet of human flesh which they had brought with them, whether
alive or dead I could not tell.

They had two canoes with them, which they had hauled up upon the shore;
and as it was then ebb of tide, they seemed to me to wait for the return
of the flood to go away again.  It is not easy to imagine what confusion
this sight put me into, especially seeing them come on my side of the
island, and so near to me; but when I considered their coming must be
always with the current of the ebb, I began afterwards to be more sedate
in my mind, being satisfied that I might go abroad with safety all the
time of the flood of tide, if they were not on shore before; and having
made this observation, I went abroad about my harvest work with the more
composure.

As I expected, so it proved; for as soon as the tide made to the westward
I saw them all take boat and row (or paddle as we call it) away.  I
should have observed, that for an hour or more before they went off they
were dancing, and I could easily discern their postures and gestures by
my glass.  I could not perceive, by my nicest observation, but that they
were stark naked, and had not the least covering upon them; but whether
they were men or women I could not distinguish.

As soon as I saw them shipped and gone, I took two guns upon my
shoulders, and two pistols in my girdle, and my great sword by my side
without a scabbard, and with all the speed I was able to make went away
to the hill where I had discovered the first appearance of all; and as
soon as I got thither, which was not in less than two hours (for I could
not go quickly, being so loaded with arms as I was), I perceived there
had been three canoes more of the savages at that place; and looking out
farther, I saw they were all at sea together, making over for the main.
This was a dreadful sight to me, especially as, going down to the shore,
I could see the marks of horror which the dismal work they had been about
had left behind it—viz. the blood, the bones, and part of the flesh of
human bodies eaten and devoured by those wretches with merriment and
sport.  I was so filled with indignation at the sight, that I now began
to premeditate the destruction of the next that I saw there, let them be
whom or how many soever.  It seemed evident to me that the visits which
they made thus to this island were not very frequent, for it was above
fifteen months before any more of them came on shore there again—that is
to say, I neither saw them nor any footsteps or signals of them in all
that time; for as to the rainy seasons, then they are sure not to come
abroad, at least not so far.  Yet all this while I lived uncomfortably,
by reason of the constant apprehensions of their coming upon me by
surprise: from whence I observe, that the expectation of evil is more
bitter than the suffering, especially if there is no room to shake off
that expectation or those apprehensions.

During all this time I was in a murdering humour, and spent most of my
hours, which should have been better employed, in contriving how to
circumvent and fall upon them the very next time I should see
them—especially if they should be divided, as they were the last time,
into two parties; nor did I consider at all that if I killed one
party—suppose ten or a dozen—I was still the next day, or week, or month,
to kill another, and so another, even _ad infinitum_, till I should be,
at length, no less a murderer than they were in being man-eaters—and
perhaps much more so.  I spent my days now in great perplexity and
anxiety of mind, expecting that I should one day or other fall into the
hands of these merciless creatures; and if I did at any time venture
abroad, it was not without looking around me with the greatest care and
caution imaginable.  And now I found, to my great comfort, how happy it
was that I had provided a tame flock or herd of goats, for I durst not
upon any account fire my gun, especially near that side of the island
where they usually came, lest I should alarm the savages; and if they had
fled from me now, I was sure to have them come again with perhaps two or
three hundred canoes with them in a few days, and then I knew what to
expect.  However, I wore out a year and three months more before I ever
saw any more of the savages, and then I found them again, as I shall soon
observe.  It is true they might have been there once or twice; but either
they made no stay, or at least I did not see them; but in the month of
May, as near as I could calculate, and in my four-and-twentieth year, I
had a very strange encounter with them; of which in its place.

The perturbation of my mind during this fifteen or sixteen months’
interval was very great; I slept unquietly, dreamed always frightful
dreams, and often started out of my sleep in the night.  In the day great
troubles overwhelmed my mind; and in the night I dreamed often of killing
the savages and of the reasons why I might justify doing it.

But to waive all this for a while.  It was in the middle of May, on the
sixteenth day, I think, as well as my poor wooden calendar would reckon,
for I marked all upon the post still; I say, it was on the sixteenth of
May that it blew a very great storm of wind all day, with a great deal of
lightning and thunder, and; a very foul night it was after it.  I knew
not what was the particular occasion of it, but as I was reading in the
Bible, and taken up with very serious thoughts about my present
condition, I was surprised with the noise of a gun, as I thought, fired
at sea.  This was, to be sure, a surprise quite of a different nature
from any I had met with before; for the notions this put into my thoughts
were quite of another kind.  I started up in the greatest haste
imaginable; and, in a trice, clapped my ladder to the middle place of the
rock, and pulled it after me; and mounting it the second time, got to the
top of the hill the very moment that a flash of fire bid me listen for a
second gun, which, accordingly, in about half a minute I heard; and by
the sound, knew that it was from that part of the sea where I was driven
down the current in my boat.  I immediately considered that this must be
some ship in distress, and that they had some comrade, or some other ship
in company, and fired these for signals of distress, and to obtain help.
I had the presence of mind at that minute to think, that though I could
not help them, it might be that they might help me; so I brought together
all the dry wood I could get at hand, and making a good handsome pile, I
set it on fire upon the hill.  The wood was dry, and blazed freely; and,
though the wind blew very hard, yet it burned fairly out; so that I was
certain, if there was any such thing as a ship, they must needs see it.
And no doubt they did; for as soon as ever my fire blazed up, I heard
another gun, and after that several others, all from the same quarter.  I
plied my fire all night long, till daybreak: and when it was broad day,
and the air cleared up, I saw something at a great distance at sea, full
east of the island, whether a sail or a hull I could not distinguish—no,
not with my glass: the distance was so great, and the weather still
something hazy also; at least, it was so out at sea.

I looked frequently at it all that day, and soon perceived that it did
not move; so I presently concluded that it was a ship at anchor; and
being eager, you may be sure, to be satisfied, I took my gun in my hand,
and ran towards the south side of the island to the rocks where I had
formerly been carried away by the current; and getting up there, the
weather by this time being perfectly clear, I could plainly see, to my
great sorrow, the wreck of a ship, cast away in the night upon those
concealed rocks which I found when I was out in my boat; and which rocks,
as they checked the violence of the stream, and made a kind of
counter-stream, or eddy, were the occasion of my recovering from the most
desperate, hopeless condition that ever I had been in in all my life.
Thus, what is one man’s safety is another man’s destruction; for it seems
these men, whoever they were, being out of their knowledge, and the rocks
being wholly under water, had been driven upon them in the night, the
wind blowing hard at ENE.  Had they seen the island, as I must
necessarily suppose they did not, they must, as I thought, have
endeavoured to have saved themselves on shore by the help of their boat;
but their firing off guns for help, especially when they saw, as I
imagined, my fire, filled me with many thoughts.  First, I imagined that
upon seeing my light they might have put themselves into their boat, and
endeavoured to make the shore: but that the sea running very high, they
might have been cast away.  Other times I imagined that they might have
lost their boat before, as might be the case many ways; particularly by
the breaking of the sea upon their ship, which many times obliged men to
stave, or take in pieces, their boat, and sometimes to throw it overboard
with their own hands.  Other times I imagined they had some other ship or
ships in company, who, upon the signals of distress they made, had taken
them up, and carried them off.  Other times I fancied they were all gone
off to sea in their boat, and being hurried away by the current that I
had been formerly in, were carried out into the great ocean, where there
was nothing but misery and perishing: and that, perhaps, they might by
this time think of starving, and of being in a condition to eat one
another.

As all these were but conjectures at best, so, in the condition I was in,
I could do no more than look on upon the misery of the poor men, and pity
them; which had still this good effect upon my side, that it gave me more
and more cause to give thanks to God, who had so happily and comfortably
provided for me in my desolate condition; and that of two ships’
companies, who were now cast away upon this part of the world, not one
life should be spared but mine.  I learned here again to observe, that it
is very rare that the providence of God casts us into any condition so
low, or any misery so great, but we may see something or other to be
thankful for, and may see others in worse circumstances than our own.
Such certainly was the case of these men, of whom I could not so much as
see room to suppose any were saved; nothing could make it rational so
much as to wish or expect that they did not all perish there, except the
possibility only of their being taken up by another ship in company; and
this was but mere possibility indeed, for I saw not the least sign or
appearance of any such thing.  I cannot explain, by any possible energy
of words, what a strange longing I felt in my soul upon this sight,
breaking out sometimes thus: “Oh that there had been but one or two, nay,
or but one soul saved out of this ship, to have escaped to me, that I
might but have had one companion, one fellow-creature, to have spoken to
me and to have conversed with!”  In all the time of my solitary life I
never felt so earnest, so strong a desire after the society of my
fellow-creatures, or so deep a regret at the want of it.

There are some secret springs in the affections which, when they are set
a-going by some object in view, or, though not in view, yet rendered
present to the mind by the power of imagination, that motion carries out
the soul, by its impetuosity, to such violent, eager embracings of the
object, that the absence of it is insupportable.  Such were these earnest
wishings that but one man had been saved.  I believe I repeated the
words, “Oh that it had been but one!” a thousand times; and my desires
were so moved by it, that when I spoke the words my hands would clinch
together, and my fingers would press the palms of my hands, so that if I
had had any soft thing in my hand I should have crushed it involuntarily;
and the teeth in my head would strike together, and set against one
another so strong, that for some time I could not part them again.  Let
the naturalists explain these things, and the reason and manner of them.
All I can do is to describe the fact, which was even surprising to me
when I found it, though I knew not from whence it proceeded; it was
doubtless the effect of ardent wishes, and of strong ideas formed in my
mind, realising the comfort which the conversation of one of my
fellow-Christians would have been to me.  But it was not to be; either
their fate or mine, or both, forbade it; for, till the last year of my
being on this island, I never knew whether any were saved out of that
ship or no; and had only the affliction, some days after, to see the
corpse of a drowned boy come on shore at the end of the island which was
next the shipwreck.  He had no clothes on but a seaman’s waistcoat, a
pair of open-kneed linen drawers, and a blue linen shirt; but nothing to
direct me so much as to guess what nation he was of.  He had nothing in
his pockets but two pieces of eight and a tobacco pipe—the last was to me
of ten times more value than the first.

It was now calm, and I had a great mind to venture out in my boat to this
wreck, not doubting but I might find something on board that might be
useful to me.  But that did not altogether press me so much as the
possibility that there might be yet some living creature on board, whose
life I might not only save, but might, by saving that life, comfort my
own to the last degree; and this thought clung so to my heart that I
could not be quiet night or day, but I must venture out in my boat on
board this wreck; and committing the rest to God’s providence, I thought
the impression was so strong upon my mind that it could not be
resisted—that it must come from some invisible direction, and that I
should be wanting to myself if I did not go.

Under the power of this impression, I hastened back to my castle,
prepared everything for my voyage, took a quantity of bread, a great pot
of fresh water, a compass to steer by, a bottle of rum (for I had still a
great deal of that left), and a basket of raisins; and thus, loading
myself with everything necessary.  I went down to my boat, got the water
out of her, got her afloat, loaded all my cargo in her, and then went
home again for more.  My second cargo was a great bag of rice, the
umbrella to set up over my head for a shade, another large pot of water,
and about two dozen of small loaves, or barley cakes, more than before,
with a bottle of goat’s milk and a cheese; all which with great labour
and sweat I carried to my boat; and praying to God to direct my voyage, I
put out, and rowing or paddling the canoe along the shore, came at last
to the utmost point of the island on the north-east side.  And now I was
to launch out into the ocean, and either to venture or not to venture.  I
looked on the rapid currents which ran constantly on both sides of the
island at a distance, and which were very terrible to me from the
remembrance of the hazard I had been in before, and my heart began to
fail me; for I foresaw that if I was driven into either of those
currents, I should be carried a great way out to sea, and perhaps out of
my reach or sight of the island again; and that then, as my boat was but
small, if any little gale of wind should rise, I should be inevitably
lost.

These thoughts so oppressed my mind that I began to give over my
enterprise; and having hauled my boat into a little creek on the shore, I
stepped out, and sat down upon a rising bit of ground, very pensive and
anxious, between fear and desire, about my voyage; when, as I was musing,
I could perceive that the tide was turned, and the flood come on; upon
which my going was impracticable for so many hours.  Upon this, presently
it occurred to me that I should go up to the highest piece of ground I
could find, and observe, if I could, how the sets of the tide or currents
lay when the flood came in, that I might judge whether, if I was driven
one way out, I might not expect to be driven another way home, with the
same rapidity of the currents.  This thought was no sooner in my head
than I cast my eye upon a little hill which sufficiently overlooked the
sea both ways, and from whence I had a clear view of the currents or sets
of the tide, and which way I was to guide myself in my return.  Here I
found, that as the current of ebb set out close by the south point of the
island, so the current of the flood set in close by the shore of the
north side; and that I had nothing to do but to keep to the north side of
the island in my return, and I should do well enough.

Encouraged by this observation, I resolved the next morning to set out
with the first of the tide; and reposing myself for the night in my
canoe, under the watch-coat I mentioned, I launched out.  I first made a
little out to sea, full north, till I began to feel the benefit of the
current, which set eastward, and which carried me at a great rate; and
yet did not so hurry me as the current on the south side had done before,
so as to take from me all government of the boat; but having a strong
steerage with my paddle, I went at a great rate directly for the wreck,
and in less than two hours I came up to it.  It was a dismal sight to
look at; the ship, which by its building was Spanish, stuck fast, jammed
in between two rocks.  All the stern and quarter of her were beaten to
pieces by the sea; and as her forecastle, which stuck in the rocks, had
run on with great violence, her mainmast and foremast were brought by the
board—that is to say, broken short off; but her bowsprit was sound, and
the head and bow appeared firm.  When I came close to her, a dog appeared
upon her, who, seeing me coming, yelped and cried; and as soon as I
called him, jumped into the sea to come to me.  I took him into the boat,
but found him almost dead with hunger and thirst.  I gave him a cake of
my bread, and he devoured it like a ravenous wolf that had been starving
a fortnight in the snow; I then gave the poor creature some fresh water,
with which, if I would have let him, he would have burst himself.  After
this I went on board; but the first sight I met with was two men drowned
in the cook-room, or forecastle of the ship, with their arms fast about
one another.  I concluded, as is indeed probable, that when the ship
struck, it being in a storm, the sea broke so high and so continually
over her, that the men were not able to bear it, and were strangled with
the constant rushing in of the water, as much as if they had been under
water.  Besides the dog, there was nothing left in the ship that had
life; nor any goods, that I could see, but what were spoiled by the
water.  There were some casks of liquor, whether wine or brandy I knew
not, which lay lower in the hold, and which, the water being ebbed out, I
could see; but they were too big to meddle with.  I saw several chests,
which I believe belonged to some of the seamen; and I got two of them
into the boat, without examining what was in them.  Had the stern of the
ship been fixed, and the forepart broken off, I am persuaded I might have
made a good voyage; for by what I found in those two chests I had room to
suppose the ship had a great deal of wealth on board; and, if I may guess
from the course she steered, she must have been bound from Buenos Ayres,
or the Rio de la Plata, in the south part of America, beyond the Brazils
to the Havannah, in the Gulf of Mexico, and so perhaps to Spain.  She
had, no doubt, a great treasure in her, but of no use, at that time, to
anybody; and what became of the crew I then knew not.

I found, besides these chests, a little cask full of liquor, of about
twenty gallons, which I got into my boat with much difficulty.  There
were several muskets in the cabin, and a great powder-horn, with about
four pounds of powder in it; as for the muskets, I had no occasion for
them, so I left them, but took the powder-horn.  I took a fire-shovel and
tongs, which I wanted extremely, as also two little brass kettles, a
copper pot to make chocolate, and a gridiron; and with this cargo, and
the dog, I came away, the tide beginning to make home again—and the same
evening, about an hour within night, I reached the island again, weary
and fatigued to the last degree.  I reposed that night in the boat and in
the morning I resolved to harbour what I had got in my new cave, and not
carry it home to my castle.  After refreshing myself, I got all my cargo
on shore, and began to examine the particulars.  The cask of liquor I
found to be a kind of rum, but not such as we had at the Brazils; and, in
a word, not at all good; but when I came to open the chests, I found
several things of great use to me—for example, I found in one a fine case
of bottles, of an extraordinary kind, and filled with cordial waters,
fine and very good; the bottles held about three pints each, and were
tipped with silver.  I found two pots of very good succades, or
sweetmeats, so fastened also on the top that the salt-water had not hurt
them; and two more of the same, which the water had spoiled.  I found
some very good shirts, which were very welcome to me; and about a dozen
and a half of white linen handkerchiefs and coloured neckcloths; the
former were also very welcome, being exceedingly refreshing to wipe my
face in a hot day.  Besides this, when I came to the till in the chest, I
found there three great bags of pieces of eight, which held about eleven
hundred pieces in all; and in one of them, wrapped up in a paper, six
doubloons of gold, and some small bars or wedges of gold; I suppose they
might all weigh near a pound.  In the other chest were some clothes, but
of little value; but, by the circumstances, it must have belonged to the
gunner’s mate; though there was no powder in it, except two pounds of
fine glazed powder, in three flasks, kept, I suppose, for charging their
fowling-pieces on occasion.  Upon the whole, I got very little by this
voyage that was of any use to me; for, as to the money, I had no manner
of occasion for it; it was to me as the dirt under my feet, and I would
have given it all for three or four pair of English shoes and stockings,
which were things I greatly wanted, but had had none on my feet for many
years.  I had, indeed, got two pair of shoes now, which I took off the
feet of two drowned men whom I saw in the wreck, and I found two pair
more in one of the chests, which were very welcome to me; but they were
not like our English shoes, either for ease or service, being rather what
we call pumps than shoes.  I found in this seaman’s chest about fifty
pieces of eight, in rials, but no gold: I supposed this belonged to a
poorer man than the other, which seemed to belong to some officer.  Well,
however, I lugged this money home to my cave, and laid it up, as I had
done that before which I had brought from our own ship; but it was a
great pity, as I said, that the other part of this ship had not come to
my share: for I am satisfied I might have loaded my canoe several times
over with money; and, thought I, if I ever escape to England, it might
lie here safe enough till I come again and fetch it.




CHAPTER XIV—A DREAM REALISED


Having now brought all my things on shore and secured them, I went back
to my boat, and rowed or paddled her along the shore to her old harbour,
where I laid her up, and made the best of my way to my old habitation,
where I found everything safe and quiet.  I began now to repose myself,
live after my old fashion, and take care of my family affairs; and for a
while I lived easy enough, only that I was more vigilant than I used to
be, looked out oftener, and did not go abroad so much; and if at any time
I did stir with any freedom, it was always to the east part of the
island, where I was pretty well satisfied the savages never came, and
where I could go without so many precautions, and such a load of arms and
ammunition as I always carried with me if I went the other way.

I lived in this condition near two years more; but my unlucky head, that
was always to let me know it was born to make my body miserable, was all
these two years filled with projects and designs how, if it were
possible, I might get away from this island: for sometimes I was for
making another voyage to the wreck, though my reason told me that there
was nothing left there worth the hazard of my voyage; sometimes for a
ramble one way, sometimes another—and I believe verily, if I had had the
boat that I went from Sallee in, I should have ventured to sea, bound
anywhere, I knew not whither.

I have been, in all my circumstances, a memento to those who are touched
with the general plague of mankind, whence, for aught I know, one half
of their miseries flow: I mean that of not being satisfied with the
station wherein God and Nature hath placed them—for, not to look back
upon my primitive condition, and the excellent advice of my father, the
opposition to which was, as I may call it, my _original sin_, my
subsequent mistakes of the same kind had been the means of my coming
into this miserable condition; for had that Providence which so happily
seated me at the Brazils as a planter blessed me with confined desires,
and I could have been contented to have gone on gradually, I might have
been by this time—I mean in the time of my being in this island—one of
the most considerable planters in the Brazils—nay, I am persuaded, that
by the improvements I had made in that little time I lived there, and
the increase I should probably have made if I had remained, I might have
been worth a hundred thousand moidores—and what business had I to leave
a settled fortune, a well-stocked plantation, improving and increasing,
to turn supercargo to Guinea to fetch negroes, when patience and time
would have so increased our stock at home, that we could have bought
them at our own door from those whose business it was to fetch them? and
though it had cost us something more, yet the difference of that price
was by no means worth saving at so great a hazard.  But as this is
usually the fate of young heads, so reflection upon the folly of it is
as commonly the exercise of more years, or of the dear-bought experience
of time—so it was with me now; and yet so deep had the mistake taken
root in my temper, that I could not satisfy myself in my station, but
was continually poring upon the means and possibility of my escape from
this place; and that I may, with greater pleasure to the reader, bring
on the remaining part of my story, it may not be improper to give some
account of my first conceptions on the subject of this foolish scheme
for my escape, and how, and upon what foundation, I acted.

I am now to be supposed retired into my castle, after my late voyage to
the wreck, my frigate laid up and secured under water, as usual, and my
condition restored to what it was before: I had more wealth, indeed, than
I had before, but was not at all the richer; for I had no more use for it
than the Indians of Peru had before the Spaniards came there.

It was one of the nights in the rainy season in March, the
four-and-twentieth year of my first setting foot in this island of
solitude, I was lying in my bed or hammock, awake, very well in health,
had no pain, no distemper, no uneasiness of body, nor any uneasiness of
mind more than ordinary, but could by no means close my eyes, that is, so
as to sleep; no, not a wink all night long, otherwise than as follows:

It is impossible to set down the innumerable crowd of thoughts that whirled
through that great thoroughfare of the brain, the memory, in this night’s
time.  I ran over the whole history of my life in miniature, or by
abridgment, as I may call it, to my coming to this island, and also of
that part of my life since I came to this island.  In my reflections upon
the state of my case since I came on shore on this island, I was
comparing the happy posture of my affairs in the first years of my
habitation here, with the life of anxiety, fear, and care which I had
lived in ever since I had seen the print of a foot in the sand.  Not that
I did not believe the savages had frequented the island even all the
while, and might have been several hundreds of them at times on shore
there; but I had never known it, and was incapable of any apprehensions
about it; my satisfaction was perfect, though my danger was the same, and
I was as happy in not knowing my danger as if I had never really been
exposed to it.  This furnished my thoughts with many very profitable
reflections, and particularly this one: How infinitely good that
Providence is, which has provided, in its government of mankind, such
narrow bounds to his sight and knowledge of things; and though he walks
in the midst of so many thousand dangers, the sight of which, if
discovered to him, would distract his mind and sink his spirits, he is
kept serene and calm, by having the events of things hid from his eyes,
and knowing nothing of the dangers which surround him.

After these thoughts had for some time entertained me, I came to reflect
seriously upon the real danger I had been in for so many years in this
very island, and how I had walked about in the greatest security, and
with all possible tranquillity, even when perhaps nothing but the brow of
a hill, a great tree, or the casual approach of night, had been between
me and the worst kind of destruction—viz. that of falling into the hands
of cannibals and savages, who would have seized on me with the same view
as I would on a goat or turtle; and have thought it no more crime to kill
and devour me than I did of a pigeon or a curlew.  I would unjustly
slander myself if I should say I was not sincerely thankful to my great
Preserver, to whose singular protection I acknowledged, with great
humanity, all these unknown deliverances were due, and without which I
must inevitably have fallen into their merciless hands.

When these thoughts were over, my head was for some time taken up in
considering the nature of these wretched creatures, I mean the savages,
and how it came to pass in the world that the wise Governor of all things
should give up any of His creatures to such inhumanity—nay, to something
so much below even brutality itself—as to devour its own kind: but as
this ended in some (at that time) fruitless speculations, it occurred to
me to inquire what part of the world these wretches lived in? how far off
the coast was from whence they came? what they ventured over so far from
home for? what kind of boats they had? and why I might not order myself
and my business so that I might be able to go over thither, as they were
to come to me?

I never so much as troubled myself to consider what I should do with
myself when I went thither; what would become of me if I fell into the
hands of these savages; or how I should escape them if they attacked me;
no, nor so much as how it was possible for me to reach the coast, and not
to be attacked by some or other of them, without any possibility of
delivering myself; and if I should not fall into their hands, what I
should do for provision, or whither I should bend my course; none of
these thoughts, I say, so much as came in my way; but my mind was wholly
bent upon the notion of my passing over in my boat to the mainland.  I
looked upon my present condition as the most miserable that could
possibly be; that I was not able to throw myself into anything but death,
that could be called worse; and if I reached the shore of the main I
might perhaps meet with relief, or I might coast along, as I did on the
African shore, till I came to some inhabited country, and where I might
find some relief; and after all, perhaps I might fall in with some
Christian ship that might take me in: and if the worst came to the worst,
I could but die, which would put an end to all these miseries at once.
Pray note, all this was the fruit of a disturbed mind, an impatient
temper, made desperate, as it were, by the long continuance of my
troubles, and the disappointments I had met in the wreck I had been on
board of, and where I had been so near obtaining what I so earnestly
longed for—somebody to speak to, and to learn some knowledge from them of
the place where I was, and of the probable means of my deliverance.  I
was agitated wholly by these thoughts; all my calm of mind, in my
resignation to Providence, and waiting the issue of the dispositions of
Heaven, seemed to be suspended; and I had as it were no power to turn my
thoughts to anything but to the project of a voyage to the main, which
came upon me with such force, and such an impetuosity of desire, that it
was not to be resisted.

When this had agitated my thoughts for two hours or more, with such
violence that it set my very blood into a ferment, and my pulse beat as
if I had been in a fever, merely with the extraordinary fervour of my
mind about it, Nature—as if I had been fatigued and exhausted with the
very thoughts of it—threw me into a sound sleep.  One would have thought
I should have dreamed of it, but I did not, nor of anything relating to
it, but I dreamed that as I was going out in the morning as usual from my
castle, I saw upon the shore two canoes and eleven savages coming to
land, and that they brought with them another savage whom they were going
to kill in order to eat him; when, on a sudden, the savage that they were
going to kill jumped away, and ran for his life; and I thought in my
sleep that he came running into my little thick grove before my
fortification, to hide himself; and that I seeing him alone, and not
perceiving that the others sought him that way, showed myself to him, and
smiling upon him, encouraged him: that he kneeled down to me, seeming to
pray me to assist him; upon which I showed him my ladder, made him go up,
and carried him into my cave, and he became my servant; and that as soon
as I had got this man, I said to myself, “Now I may certainly venture to
the mainland, for this fellow will serve me as a pilot, and will tell me
what to do, and whither to go for provisions, and whither not to go for
fear of being devoured; what places to venture into, and what to shun.”
I waked with this thought; and was under such inexpressible impressions
of joy at the prospect of my escape in my dream, that the disappointments
which I felt upon coming to myself, and finding that it was no more than
a dream, were equally extravagant the other way, and threw me into a very
great dejection of spirits.

Upon this, however, I made this conclusion: that my only way to go about
to attempt an escape was, to endeavour to get a savage into my
possession: and, if possible, it should be one of their prisoners, whom
they had condemned to be eaten, and should bring hither to kill.  But
these thoughts still were attended with this difficulty: that it was
impossible to effect this without attacking a whole caravan of them, and
killing them all; and this was not only a very desperate attempt, and
might miscarry, but, on the other hand, I had greatly scrupled the
lawfulness of it to myself; and my heart trembled at the thoughts of
shedding so much blood, though it was for my deliverance.  I need not
repeat the arguments which occurred to me against this, they being the
same mentioned before; but though I had other reasons to offer now—viz.
that those men were enemies to my life, and would devour me if they
could; that it was self-preservation, in the highest degree, to deliver
myself from this death of a life, and was acting in my own defence as
much as if they were actually assaulting me, and the like; I say though
these things argued for it, yet the thoughts of shedding human blood for
my deliverance were very terrible to me, and such as I could by no means
reconcile myself to for a great while.  However, at last, after many
secret disputes with myself, and after great perplexities about it (for
all these arguments, one way and another, struggled in my head a long
time), the eager prevailing desire of deliverance at length mastered all
the rest; and I resolved, if possible, to get one of these savages into
my hands, cost what it would.  My next thing was to contrive how to do
it, and this, indeed, was very difficult to resolve on; but as I could
pitch upon no probable means for it, so I resolved to put myself upon the
watch, to see them when they came on shore, and leave the rest to the
event; taking such measures as the opportunity should present, let what
would be.

With these resolutions in my thoughts, I set myself upon the scout as
often as possible, and indeed so often that I was heartily tired of it;
for it was above a year and a half that I waited; and for great part of
that time went out to the west end, and to the south-west corner of the
island almost every day, to look for canoes, but none appeared.  This was
very discouraging, and began to trouble me much, though I cannot say that
it did in this case (as it had done some time before) wear off the edge
of my desire to the thing; but the longer it seemed to be delayed, the
more eager I was for it: in a word, I was not at first so careful to shun
the sight of these savages, and avoid being seen by them, as I was now
eager to be upon them.  Besides, I fancied myself able to manage one,
nay, two or three savages, if I had them, so as to make them entirely
slaves to me, to do whatever I should direct them, and to prevent their
being able at any time to do me any hurt.  It was a great while that I
pleased myself with this affair; but nothing still presented itself; all
my fancies and schemes came to nothing, for no savages came near me for a
great while.

About a year and a half after I entertained these notions (and by long
musing had, as it were, resolved them all into nothing, for want of an
occasion to put them into execution), I was surprised one morning by
seeing no less than five canoes all on shore together on my side the
island, and the people who belonged to them all landed and out of my
sight.  The number of them broke all my measures; for seeing so many, and
knowing that they always came four or six, or sometimes more in a boat, I
could not tell what to think of it, or how to take my measures to attack
twenty or thirty men single-handed; so lay still in my castle, perplexed
and discomforted.  However, I put myself into the same position for an
attack that I had formerly provided, and was just ready for action, if
anything had presented.  Having waited a good while, listening to hear if
they made any noise, at length, being very impatient, I set my guns at
the foot of my ladder, and clambered up to the top of the hill, by my two
stages, as usual; standing so, however, that my head did not appear above
the hill, so that they could not perceive me by any means.  Here I
observed, by the help of my perspective glass, that they were no less
than thirty in number; that they had a fire kindled, and that they had
meat dressed.  How they had cooked it I knew not, or what it was; but
they were all dancing, in I know not how many barbarous gestures and
figures, their own way, round the fire.

While I was thus looking on them, I perceived, by my perspective, two
miserable wretches dragged from the boats, where, it seems, they were
laid by, and were now brought out for the slaughter.  I perceived one of
them immediately fall; being knocked down, I suppose, with a club or
wooden sword, for that was their way; and two or three others were at
work immediately, cutting him open for their cookery, while the other
victim was left standing by himself, till they should be ready for him.
In that very moment this poor wretch, seeing himself a little at liberty
and unbound, Nature inspired him with hopes of life, and he started away
from them, and ran with incredible swiftness along the sands, directly
towards me; I mean towards that part of the coast where my habitation
was.  I was dreadfully frightened, I must acknowledge, when I perceived
him run my way; and especially when, as I thought, I saw him pursued by
the whole body: and now I expected that part of my dream was coming to
pass, and that he would certainly take shelter in my grove; but I could
not depend, by any means, upon my dream, that the other savages would not
pursue him thither and find him there.  However, I kept my station, and
my spirits began to recover when I found that there was not above three
men that followed him; and still more was I encouraged, when I found that
he outstripped them exceedingly in running, and gained ground on them; so
that, if he could but hold out for half-an-hour, I saw easily he would
fairly get away from them all.

There was between them and my castle the creek, which I mentioned often
in the first part of my story, where I landed my cargoes out of the ship;
and this I saw plainly he must necessarily swim over, or the poor wretch
would be taken there; but when the savage escaping came thither, he made
nothing of it, though the tide was then up; but plunging in, swam through
in about thirty strokes, or thereabouts, landed, and ran with exceeding
strength and swiftness.  When the three persons came to the creek, I
found that two of them could swim, but the third could not, and that,
standing on the other side, he looked at the others, but went no farther,
and soon after went softly back again; which, as it happened, was very
well for him in the end.  I observed that the two who swam were yet more
than twice as strong swimming over the creek as the fellow was that fled
from them.  It came very warmly upon my thoughts, and indeed
irresistibly, that now was the time to get me a servant, and, perhaps, a
companion or assistant; and that I was plainly called by Providence to
save this poor creature’s life.  I immediately ran down the ladders with
all possible expedition, fetched my two guns, for they were both at the
foot of the ladders, as I observed before, and getting up again with the
same haste to the top of the hill, I crossed towards the sea; and having
a very short cut, and all down hill, placed myself in the way between the
pursuers and the pursued, hallowing aloud to him that fled, who, looking
back, was at first perhaps as much frightened at me as at them; but I
beckoned with my hand to him to come back; and, in the meantime, I slowly
advanced towards the two that followed; then rushing at once upon the
foremost, I knocked him down with the stock of my piece.  I was loath to
fire, because I would not have the rest hear; though, at that distance,
it would not have been easily heard, and being out of sight of the smoke,
too, they would not have known what to make of it.  Having knocked this
fellow down, the other who pursued him stopped, as if he had been
frightened, and I advanced towards him: but as I came nearer, I perceived
presently he had a bow and arrow, and was fitting it to shoot at me: so I
was then obliged to shoot at him first, which I did, and killed him at
the first shot.  The poor savage who fled, but had stopped, though he saw
both his enemies fallen and killed, as he thought, yet was so frightened
with the fire and noise of my piece that he stood stock still, and
neither came forward nor went backward, though he seemed rather inclined
still to fly than to come on.  I hallooed again to him, and made signs to
come forward, which he easily understood, and came a little way; then
stopped again, and then a little farther, and stopped again; and I could
then perceive that he stood trembling, as if he had been taken prisoner,
and had just been to be killed, as his two enemies were.  I beckoned to
him again to come to me, and gave him all the signs of encouragement that
I could think of; and he came nearer and nearer, kneeling down every ten
or twelve steps, in token of acknowledgment for saving his life.  I
smiled at him, and looked pleasantly, and beckoned to him to come still
nearer; at length he came close to me; and then he kneeled down again,
kissed the ground, and laid his head upon the ground, and taking me by
the foot, set my foot upon his head; this, it seems, was in token of
swearing to be my slave for ever.  I took him up and made much of him,
and encouraged him all I could.  But there was more work to do yet; for I
perceived the savage whom I had knocked down was not killed, but stunned
with the blow, and began to come to himself: so I pointed to him, and
showed him the savage, that he was not dead; upon this he spoke some
words to me, and though I could not understand them, yet I thought they
were pleasant to hear; for they were the first sound of a man’s voice
that I had heard, my own excepted, for above twenty-five years.  But
there was no time for such reflections now; the savage who was knocked
down recovered himself so far as to sit up upon the ground, and I
perceived that my savage began to be afraid; but when I saw that, I
presented my other piece at the man, as if I would shoot him: upon this
my savage, for so I call him now, made a motion to me to lend him my
sword, which hung naked in a belt by my side, which I did.  He no sooner
had it, but he runs to his enemy, and at one blow cut off his head so
cleverly, no executioner in Germany could have done it sooner or better;
which I thought very strange for one who, I had reason to believe, never
saw a sword in his life before, except their own wooden swords: however,
it seems, as I learned afterwards, they make their wooden swords so
sharp, so heavy, and the wood is so hard, that they will even cut off
heads with them, ay, and arms, and that at one blow, too.  When he had
done this, he comes laughing to me in sign of triumph, and brought me the
sword again, and with abundance of gestures which I did not understand,
laid it down, with the head of the savage that he had killed, just before
me.  But that which astonished him most was to know how I killed the
other Indian so far off; so, pointing to him, he made signs to me to let
him go to him; and I bade him go, as well as I could.  When he came to
him, he stood like one amazed, looking at him, turning him first on one
side, then on the other; looked at the wound the bullet had made, which
it seems was just in his breast, where it had made a hole, and no great
quantity of blood had followed; but he had bled inwardly, for he was
quite dead.  He took up his bow and arrows, and came back; so I turned to
go away, and beckoned him to follow me, making signs to him that more
might come after them.  Upon this he made signs to me that he should bury
them with sand, that they might not be seen by the rest, if they
followed; and so I made signs to him again to do so.  He fell to work;
and in an instant he had scraped a hole in the sand with his hands big
enough to bury the first in, and then dragged him into it, and covered
him; and did so by the other also; I believe he had him buried them both
in a quarter of an hour.  Then, calling away, I carried him, not to my
castle, but quite away to my cave, on the farther part of the island: so
I did not let my dream come to pass in that part, that he came into my
grove for shelter.  Here I gave him bread and a bunch of raisins to eat,
and a draught of water, which I found he was indeed in great distress
for, from his running: and having refreshed him, I made signs for him to
go and lie down to sleep, showing him a place where I had laid some
rice-straw, and a blanket upon it, which I used to sleep upon myself
sometimes; so the poor creature lay down, and went to sleep.

He was a comely, handsome fellow, perfectly well made, with straight,
strong limbs, not too large; tall, and well-shaped; and, as I reckon,
about twenty-six years of age.  He had a very good countenance, not a
fierce and surly aspect, but seemed to have something very manly in his
face; and yet he had all the sweetness and softness of a European in his
countenance, too, especially when he smiled.  His hair was long and
black, not curled like wool; his forehead very high and large; and a
great vivacity and sparkling sharpness in his eyes.  The colour of his
skin was not quite black, but very tawny; and yet not an ugly, yellow,
nauseous tawny, as the Brazilians and Virginians, and other natives of
America are, but of a bright kind of a dun olive-colour, that had in it
something very agreeable, though not very easy to describe.  His face was
round and plump; his nose small, not flat, like the negroes; a very good
mouth, thin lips, and his fine teeth well set, and as white as ivory.

After he had slumbered, rather than slept, about half-an-hour, he awoke
again, and came out of the cave to me, for I had been milking my goats
which I had in the enclosure just by: when he espied me he came running
to me, laying himself down again upon the ground, with all the possible
signs of an humble, thankful disposition, making a great many antic
gestures to show it.  At last he lays his head flat upon the ground,
close to my foot, and sets my other foot upon his head, as he had done
before; and after this made all the signs to me of subjection, servitude,
and submission imaginable, to let me know how he would serve me so long
as he lived.  I understood him in many things, and let him know I was
very well pleased with him.  In a little time I began to speak to him;
and teach him to speak to me; and first, I let him know his name should
be Friday, which was the day I saved his life; I called him so for the
memory of the time.  I likewise taught him to say Master; and then let
him know that was to be my name; I likewise taught him to say Yes and No
and to know the meaning of them.  I gave him some milk in an earthen pot,
and let him see me drink it before him, and sop my bread in it; and gave
him a cake of bread to do the like, which he quickly complied with, and
made signs that it was very good for him.  I kept there with him all that
night; but as soon as it was day I beckoned to him to come with me, and
let him know I would give him some clothes; at which he seemed very glad,
for he was stark naked.  As we went by the place where he had buried the
two men, he pointed exactly to the place, and showed me the marks that he
had made to find them again, making signs to me that we should dig them
up again and eat them.  At this I appeared very angry, expressed my
abhorrence of it, made as if I would vomit at the thoughts of it, and
beckoned with my hand to him to come away, which he did immediately, with
great submission.  I then led him up to the top of the hill, to see if
his enemies were gone; and pulling out my glass I looked, and saw plainly
the place where they had been, but no appearance of them or their canoes;
so that it was plain they were gone, and had left their two comrades
behind them, without any search after them.

But I was not content with this discovery; but having now more courage,
and consequently more curiosity, I took my man Friday with me, giving him
the sword in his hand, with the bow and arrows at his back, which I found
he could use very dexterously, making him carry one gun for me, and I two
for myself; and away we marched to the place where these creatures had
been; for I had a mind now to get some further intelligence of them.
When I came to the place my very blood ran chill in my veins, and my
heart sunk within me, at the horror of the spectacle; indeed, it was a
dreadful sight, at least it was so to me, though Friday made nothing of
it.  The place was covered with human bones, the ground dyed with their
blood, and great pieces of flesh left here and there, half-eaten,
mangled, and scorched; and, in short, all the tokens of the triumphant
feast they had been making there, after a victory over their enemies.  I
saw three skulls, five hands, and the bones of three or four legs and
feet, and abundance of other parts of the bodies; and Friday, by his
signs, made me understand that they brought over four prisoners to feast
upon; that three of them were eaten up, and that he, pointing to himself,
was the fourth; that there had been a great battle between them and their
next king, of whose subjects, it seems, he had been one, and that they
had taken a great number of prisoners; all which were carried to several
places by those who had taken them in the fight, in order to feast upon
them, as was done here by these wretches upon those they brought hither.

I caused Friday to gather all the skulls, bones, flesh, and whatever
remained, and lay them together in a heap, and make a great fire upon it,
and burn them all to ashes.  I found Friday had still a hankering stomach
after some of the flesh, and was still a cannibal in his nature; but I
showed so much abhorrence at the very thoughts of it, and at the least
appearance of it, that he durst not discover it: for I had, by some
means, let him know that I would kill him if he offered it.

When he had done this, we came back to our castle; and there I fell to
work for my man Friday; and first of all, I gave him a pair of linen
drawers, which I had out of the poor gunner’s chest I mentioned, which I
found in the wreck, and which, with a little alteration, fitted him very
well; and then I made him a jerkin of goat’s skin, as well as my skill
would allow (for I was now grown a tolerably good tailor); and I gave him
a cap which I made of hare’s skin, very convenient, and fashionable
enough; and thus he was clothed, for the present, tolerably well, and was
mighty well pleased to see himself almost as well clothed as his master.
It is true he went awkwardly in these clothes at first: wearing the
drawers was very awkward to him, and the sleeves of the waistcoat galled
his shoulders and the inside of his arms; but a little easing them where
he complained they hurt him, and using himself to them, he took to them
at length very well.

The next day, after I came home to my hutch with him, I began to consider
where I should lodge him: and that I might do well for him and yet be
perfectly easy myself, I made a little tent for him in the vacant place
between my two fortifications, in the inside of the last, and in the
outside of the first.  As there was a door or entrance there into my
cave, I made a formal framed door-case, and a door to it, of boards, and
set it up in the passage, a little within the entrance; and, causing the
door to open in the inside, I barred it up in the night, taking in my
ladders, too; so that Friday could no way come at me in the inside of my
innermost wall, without making so much noise in getting over that it must
needs awaken me; for my first wall had now a complete roof over it of
long poles, covering all my tent, and leaning up to the side of the hill;
which was again laid across with smaller sticks, instead of laths, and
then thatched over a great thickness with the rice-straw, which was
strong, like reeds; and at the hole or place which was left to go in or
out by the ladder I had placed a kind of trap-door, which, if it had been
attempted on the outside, would not have opened at all, but would have
fallen down and made a great noise—as to weapons, I took them all into my
side every night.  But I needed none of all this precaution; for never
man had a more faithful, loving, sincere servant than Friday was to me:
without passions, sullenness, or designs, perfectly obliged and engaged;
his very affections were tied to me, like those of a child to a father;
and I daresay he would have sacrificed his life to save mine upon any
occasion whatsoever—the many testimonies he gave me of this put it out of
doubt, and soon convinced me that I needed to use no precautions for my
safety on his account.

This frequently gave me occasion to observe, and that with wonder, that
however it had pleased God in His providence, and in the government of
the works of His hands, to take from so great a part of the world of His
creatures the best uses to which their faculties and the powers of their
souls are adapted, yet that He has bestowed upon them the same powers,
the same reason, the same affections, the same sentiments of kindness and
obligation, the same passions and resentments of wrongs, the same sense
of gratitude, sincerity, fidelity, and all the capacities of doing good
and receiving good that He has given to us; and that when He pleases to
offer them occasions of exerting these, they are as ready, nay, more
ready, to apply them to the right uses for which they were bestowed than
we are.  This made me very melancholy sometimes, in reflecting, as the
several occasions presented, how mean a use we make of all these, even
though we have these powers enlightened by the great lamp of instruction,
the Spirit of God, and by the knowledge of His word added to our
understanding; and why it has pleased God to hide the like saving
knowledge from so many millions of souls, who, if I might judge by this
poor savage, would make a much better use of it than we did.  From hence
I sometimes was led too far, to invade the sovereignty of Providence,
and, as it were, arraign the justice of so arbitrary a disposition of
things, that should hide that sight from some, and reveal it to others,
and yet expect a like duty from both; but I shut it up, and checked my
thoughts with this conclusion: first, that we did not know by what light
and law these should be condemned; but that as God was necessarily, and
by the nature of His being, infinitely holy and just, so it could not be,
but if these creatures were all sentenced to absence from Himself, it was
on account of sinning against that light which, as the Scripture says,
was a law to themselves, and by such rules as their consciences would
acknowledge to be just, though the foundation was not discovered to us;
and secondly, that still as we all are the clay in the hand of the
potter, no vessel could say to him, “Why hast thou formed me thus?”

But to return to my new companion.  I was greatly delighted with him, and
made it my business to teach him everything that was proper to make him
useful, handy, and helpful; but especially to make him speak, and
understand me when I spoke; and he was the aptest scholar that ever was;
and particularly was so merry, so constantly diligent, and so pleased
when he could but understand me, or make me understand him, that it was
very pleasant for me to talk to him.  Now my life began to be so easy
that I began to say to myself that could I but have been safe from more
savages, I cared not if I was never to remove from the place where I
lived.




CHAPTER XV—FRIDAY’S EDUCATION


After I had been two or three days returned to my castle, I thought that,
in order to bring Friday off from his horrid way of feeding, and from the
relish of a cannibal’s stomach, I ought to let him taste other flesh; so
I took him out with me one morning to the woods.  I went, indeed,
intending to kill a kid out of my own flock; and bring it home and dress
it; but as I was going I saw a she-goat lying down in the shade, and two
young kids sitting by her.  I catched hold of Friday.  “Hold,” said I,
“stand still;” and made signs to him not to stir: immediately I presented
my piece, shot, and killed one of the kids.  The poor creature, who had
at a distance, indeed, seen me kill the savage, his enemy, but did not
know, nor could imagine how it was done, was sensibly surprised,
trembled, and shook, and looked so amazed that I thought he would have
sunk down.  He did not see the kid I shot at, or perceive I had killed
it, but ripped up his waistcoat to feel whether he was not wounded; and,
as I found presently, thought I was resolved to kill him: for he came and
kneeled down to me, and embracing my knees, said a great many things I
did not understand; but I could easily see the meaning was to pray me not
to kill him.

I soon found a way to convince him that I would do him no harm; and
taking him up by the hand, laughed at him, and pointing to the kid which
I had killed, beckoned to him to run and fetch it, which he did: and
while he was wondering, and looking to see how the creature was killed, I
loaded my gun again.  By-and-by I saw a great fowl, like a hawk, sitting
upon a tree within shot; so, to let Friday understand a little what I
would do, I called him to me again, pointed at the fowl, which was indeed
a parrot, though I thought it had been a hawk; I say, pointing to the
parrot, and to my gun, and to the ground under the parrot, to let him see
I would make it fall, I made him understand that I would shoot and kill
that bird; accordingly, I fired, and bade him look, and immediately he
saw the parrot fall.  He stood like one frightened again, notwithstanding
all I had said to him; and I found he was the more amazed, because he did
not see me put anything into the gun, but thought that there must be some
wonderful fund of death and destruction in that thing, able to kill man,
beast, bird, or anything near or far off; and the astonishment this
created in him was such as could not wear off for a long time; and I
believe, if I would have let him, he would have worshipped me and my gun.
As for the gun itself, he would not so much as touch it for several days
after; but he would speak to it and talk to it, as if it had answered
him, when he was by himself; which, as I afterwards learned of him, was
to desire it not to kill him.  Well, after his astonishment was a little
over at this, I pointed to him to run and fetch the bird I had shot,
which he did, but stayed some time; for the parrot, not being quite dead,
had fluttered away a good distance from the place where she fell:
however, he found her, took her up, and brought her to me; and as I had
perceived his ignorance about the gun before, I took this advantage to
charge the gun again, and not to let him see me do it, that I might be
ready for any other mark that might present; but nothing more offered at
that time: so I brought home the kid, and the same evening I took the
skin off, and cut it out as well as I could; and having a pot fit for
that purpose, I boiled or stewed some of the flesh, and made some very
good broth.  After I had begun to eat some I gave some to my man, who
seemed very glad of it, and liked it very well; but that which was
strangest to him was to see me eat salt with it.  He made a sign to me
that the salt was not good to eat; and putting a little into his own
mouth, he seemed to nauseate it, and would spit and sputter at it,
washing his mouth with fresh water after it: on the other hand, I took
some meat into my mouth without salt, and I pretended to spit and sputter
for want of salt, as much as he had done at the salt; but it would not
do; he would never care for salt with meat or in his broth; at least, not
for a great while, and then but a very little.

Having thus fed him with boiled meat and broth, I was resolved to feast
him the next day by roasting a piece of the kid: this I did by hanging it
before the fire on a string, as I had seen many people do in England,
setting two poles up, one on each side of the fire, and one across the
top, and tying the string to the cross stick, letting the meat turn
continually.  This Friday admired very much; but when he came to taste
the flesh, he took so many ways to tell me how well he liked it, that I
could not but understand him: and at last he told me, as well as he
could, he would never eat man’s flesh any more, which I was very glad to
hear.

The next day I set him to work beating some corn out, and sifting it in
the manner I used to do, as I observed before; and he soon understood how
to do it as well as I, especially after he had seen what the meaning of
it was, and that it was to make bread of; for after that I let him see me
make my bread, and bake it too; and in a little time Friday was able to
do all the work for me as well as I could do it myself.

I began now to consider, that having two mouths to feed instead of one, I
must provide more ground for my harvest, and plant a larger quantity of
corn than I used to do; so I marked out a larger piece of land, and began
the fence in the same manner as before, in which Friday worked not only
very willingly and very hard, but did it very cheerfully: and I told him
what it was for; that it was for corn to make more bread, because he was
now with me, and that I might have enough for him and myself too.  He
appeared very sensible of that part, and let me know that he thought I
had much more labour upon me on his account than I had for myself; and
that he would work the harder for me if I would tell him what to do.

This was the pleasantest year of all the life I led in this place.
Friday began to talk pretty well, and understand the names of almost
everything I had occasion to call for, and of every place I had to send
him to, and talked a great deal to me; so that, in short, I began now to
have some use for my tongue again, which, indeed, I had very little
occasion for before.  Besides the pleasure of talking to him, I had a
singular satisfaction in the fellow himself: his simple, unfeigned
honesty appeared to me more and more every day, and I began really to
love the creature; and on his side I believe he loved me more than it was
possible for him ever to love anything before.

I had a mind once to try if he had any inclination for his own country
again; and having taught him English so well that he could answer me
almost any question, I asked him whether the nation that he belonged to
never conquered in battle?  At which he smiled, and said—“Yes, yes, we
always fight the better;” that is, he meant always get the better in
fight; and so we began the following discourse:—

_Master_.—You always fight the better; how came you to be taken prisoner,
then, Friday?

_Friday_.—My nation beat much for all that.

_Master_.—How beat?  If your nation beat them, how came you to be taken?

_Friday_.—They more many than my nation, in the place where me was; they
take one, two, three, and me: my nation over-beat them in the yonder
place, where me no was; there my nation take one, two, great thousand.

_Master_.—But why did not your side recover you from the hands of your
enemies, then?

_Friday_.—They run, one, two, three, and me, and make go in the canoe; my
nation have no canoe that time.

_Master_.—Well, Friday, and what does your nation do with the men they
take?  Do they carry them away and eat them, as these did?

_Friday_.—Yes, my nation eat mans too; eat all up.

_Master_.—Where do they carry them?

_Friday_.—Go to other place, where they think.

_Master_.—Do they come hither?

_Friday_.—Yes, yes, they come hither; come other else place.

_Master_.—Have you been here with them?

_Friday_.—Yes, I have been here (points to the NW. side of the island,
which, it seems, was their side).

By this I understood that my man Friday had formerly been among the
savages who used to come on shore on the farther part of the island, on
the same man-eating occasions he was now brought for; and some time
after, when I took the courage to carry him to that side, being the same
I formerly mentioned, he presently knew the place, and told me he was
there once, when they ate up twenty men, two women, and one child; he
could not tell twenty in English, but he numbered them by laying so many
stones in a row, and pointing to me to tell them over.

I have told this passage, because it introduces what follows: that after
this discourse I had with him, I asked him how far it was from our island
to the shore, and whether the canoes were not often lost.  He told me
there was no danger, no canoes ever lost: but that after a little way out
to sea, there was a current and wind, always one way in the morning, the
other in the afternoon.  This I understood to be no more than the sets of
the tide, as going out or coming in; but I afterwards understood it was
occasioned by the great draft and reflux of the mighty river Orinoco, in
the mouth or gulf of which river, as I found afterwards, our island lay;
and that this land, which I perceived to be W. and NW., was the great
island Trinidad, on the north point of the mouth of the river.  I asked
Friday a thousand questions about the country, the inhabitants, the sea,
the coast, and what nations were near; he told me all he knew with the
greatest openness imaginable.  I asked him the names of the several
nations of his sort of people, but could get no other name than Caribs;
from whence I easily understood that these were the Caribbees, which our
maps place on the part of America which reaches from the mouth of the
river Orinoco to Guiana, and onwards to St. Martha.  He told me that up a
great way beyond the moon, that was beyond the setting of the moon, which
must be west from their country, there dwelt white bearded men, like me,
and pointed to my great whiskers, which I mentioned before; and that they
had killed much mans, that was his word: by all which I understood he
meant the Spaniards, whose cruelties in America had been spread over the
whole country, and were remembered by all the nations from father to son.

I inquired if he could tell me how I might go from this island, and get
among those white men.  He told me, “Yes, yes, you may go in two canoe.”
I could not understand what he meant, or make him describe to me what he
meant by two canoe, till at last, with great difficulty, I found he meant
it must be in a large boat, as big as two canoes.  This part of Friday’s
discourse I began to relish very well; and from this time I entertained
some hopes that, one time or other, I might find an opportunity to make
my escape from this place, and that this poor savage might be a means to
help me.

During the long time that Friday had now been with me, and that he began
to speak to me, and understand me, I was not wanting to lay a foundation
of religious knowledge in his mind; particularly I asked him one time,
who made him.  The creature did not understand me at all, but thought I
had asked who was his father—but I took it up by another handle, and
asked him who made the sea, the ground we walked on, and the hills and
woods.  He told me, “It was one Benamuckee, that lived beyond all;” he
could describe nothing of this great person, but that he was very old,
“much older,” he said, “than the sea or land, than the moon or the
stars.”  I asked him then, if this old person had made all things, why
did not all things worship him?  He looked very grave, and, with a
perfect look of innocence, said, “All things say O to him.”  I asked him
if the people who die in his country went away anywhere?  He said, “Yes;
they all went to Benamuckee.”  Then I asked him whether those they eat up
went thither too.  He said, “Yes.”

From these things, I began to instruct him in the knowledge of the true
God; I told him that the great Maker of all things lived up there,
pointing up towards heaven; that He governed the world by the same power
and providence by which He made it; that He was omnipotent, and could do
everything for us, give everything to us, take everything from us; and
thus, by degrees, I opened his eyes.  He listened with great attention,
and received with pleasure the notion of Jesus Christ being sent to
redeem us; and of the manner of making our prayers to God, and His being
able to hear us, even in heaven.  He told me one day, that if our God
could hear us, up beyond the sun, he must needs be a greater God than
their Benamuckee, who lived but a little way off, and yet could not hear
till they went up to the great mountains where he dwelt to speak to them.
I asked him if ever he went thither to speak to him.  He said, “No; they
never went that were young men; none went thither but the old men,” whom
he called their Oowokakee; that is, as I made him explain to me, their
religious, or clergy; and that they went to say O (so he called saying
prayers), and then came back and told them what Benamuckee said.  By this
I observed, that there is priestcraft even among the most blinded,
ignorant pagans in the world; and the policy of making a secret of
religion, in order to preserve the veneration of the people to the
clergy, not only to be found in the Roman, but, perhaps, among all
religions in the world, even among the most brutish and barbarous
savages.

I endeavoured to clear up this fraud to my man Friday; and told him that
the pretence of their old men going up to the mountains to say O to their
god Benamuckee was a cheat; and their bringing word from thence what he
said was much more so; that if they met with any answer, or spake with
any one there, it must be with an evil spirit; and then I entered into a
long discourse with him about the devil, the origin of him, his rebellion
against God, his enmity to man, the reason of it, his setting himself up
in the dark parts of the world to be worshipped instead of God, and as
God, and the many stratagems he made use of to delude mankind to their
ruin; how he had a secret access to our passions and to our affections,
and to adapt his snares to our inclinations, so as to cause us even to be
our own tempters, and run upon our destruction by our own choice.

I found it was not so easy to imprint right notions in his mind about the
devil as it was about the being of a God.  Nature assisted all my
arguments to evidence to him even the necessity of a great First Cause,
an overruling, governing Power, a secret directing Providence, and of the
equity and justice of paying homage to Him that made us, and the like;
but there appeared nothing of this kind in the notion of an evil spirit,
of his origin, his being, his nature, and above all, of his inclination
to do evil, and to draw us in to do so too; and the poor creature puzzled
me once in such a manner, by a question merely natural and innocent, that
I scarce knew what to say to him.  I had been talking a great deal to him
of the power of God, His omnipotence, His aversion to sin, His being a
consuming fire to the workers of iniquity; how, as He had made us all, He
could destroy us and all the world in a moment; and he listened with
great seriousness to me all the while.  After this I had been telling him
how the devil was God’s enemy in the hearts of men, and used all his
malice and skill to defeat the good designs of Providence, and to ruin
the kingdom of Christ in the world, and the like.  “Well,” says Friday,
“but you say God is so strong, so great; is He not much strong, much
might as the devil?”  “Yes, yes,” says I, “Friday; God is stronger than
the devil—God is above the devil, and therefore we pray to God to tread
him down under our feet, and enable us to resist his temptations and
quench his fiery darts.”  “But,” says he again, “if God much stronger,
much might as the wicked devil, why God no kill the devil, so make him no
more do wicked?”  I was strangely surprised at this question; and, after
all, though I was now an old man, yet I was but a young doctor, and ill
qualified for a casuist or a solver of difficulties; and at first I could
not tell what to say; so I pretended not to hear him, and asked him what
he said; but he was too earnest for an answer to forget his question, so
that he repeated it in the very same broken words as above.  By this time
I had recovered myself a little, and I said, “God will at last punish him
severely; he is reserved for the judgment, and is to be cast into the
bottomless pit, to dwell with everlasting fire.”  This did not satisfy
Friday; but he returns upon me, repeating my words, “‘_Reserve at last_!’
me no understand—but why not kill the devil now; not kill great ago?”
“You may as well ask me,” said I, “why God does not kill you or me, when
we do wicked things here that offend Him—we are preserved to repent and
be pardoned.”  He mused some time on this.  “Well, well,” says he, mighty
affectionately, “that well—so you, I, devil, all wicked, all preserve,
repent, God pardon all.”  Here I was run down again by him to the last
degree; and it was a testimony to me, how the mere notions of nature,
though they will guide reasonable creatures to the knowledge of a God,
and of a worship or homage due to the supreme being of God, as the
consequence of our nature, yet nothing but divine revelation can form the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and of redemption purchased for us; of a
Mediator of the new covenant, and of an Intercessor at the footstool of
God’s throne; I say, nothing but a revelation from Heaven can form these
in the soul; and that, therefore, the gospel of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, I mean the Word of God, and the Spirit of God, promised for
the guide and sanctifier of His people, are the absolutely necessary
instructors of the souls of men in the saving knowledge of God and the
means of salvation.

I therefore diverted the present discourse between me and my man, rising
up hastily, as upon some sudden occasion of going out; then sending him
for something a good way off, I seriously prayed to God that He would
enable me to instruct savingly this poor savage; assisting, by His
Spirit, the heart of the poor ignorant creature to receive the light of
the knowledge of God in Christ, reconciling him to Himself, and would
guide me so to speak to him from the Word of God that his conscience
might be convinced, his eyes opened, and his soul saved.  When he came
again to me, I entered into a long discourse with him upon the subject of
the redemption of man by the Saviour of the world, and of the doctrine of
the gospel preached from Heaven, viz. of repentance towards God, and
faith in our blessed Lord Jesus.  I then explained to him as well as I
could why our blessed Redeemer took not on Him the nature of angels but
the seed of Abraham; and how, for that reason, the fallen angels had no
share in the redemption; that He came only to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, and the like.

I had, God knows, more sincerity than knowledge in all the methods I took
for this poor creature’s instruction, and must acknowledge, what I
believe all that act upon the same principle will find, that in laying
things open to him, I really informed and instructed myself in many
things that either I did not know or had not fully considered before, but
which occurred naturally to my mind upon searching into them, for the
information of this poor savage; and I had more affection in my inquiry
after things upon this occasion than ever I felt before: so that, whether
this poor wild wretch was better for me or no, I had great reason to be
thankful that ever he came to me; my grief sat lighter, upon me; my
habitation grew comfortable to me beyond measure: and when I reflected
that in this solitary life which I have been confined to, I had not only
been moved to look up to heaven myself, and to seek the Hand that had
brought me here, but was now to be made an instrument, under Providence,
to save the life, and, for aught I knew, the soul of a poor savage, and
bring him to the true knowledge of religion and of the Christian
doctrine, that he might know Christ Jesus, in whom is life eternal; I
say, when I reflected upon all these things, a secret joy ran through
every part of My soul, and I frequently rejoiced that ever I was brought
to this place, which I had so often thought the most dreadful of all
afflictions that could possibly have befallen me.

I continued in this thankful frame all the remainder of my time; and the
conversation which employed the hours between Friday and me was such as
made the three years which we lived there together perfectly and
completely happy, if any such thing as complete happiness can be formed
in a sublunary state.  This savage was now a good Christian, a much
better than I; though I have reason to hope, and bless God for it, that
we were equally penitent, and comforted, restored penitents.  We had here
the Word of God to read, and no farther off from His Spirit to instruct
than if we had been in England.  I always applied myself, in reading the
Scripture, to let him know, as well as I could, the meaning of what I
read; and he again, by his serious inquiries and questionings, made me,
as I said before, a much better scholar in the Scripture knowledge than I
should ever have been by my own mere private reading.  Another thing I
cannot refrain from observing here also, from experience in this retired
part of my life, viz. how infinite and inexpressible a blessing it is
that the knowledge of God, and of the doctrine of salvation by Christ
Jesus, is so plainly laid down in the Word of God, so easy to be received
and understood, that, as the bare reading the Scripture made me capable
of understanding enough of my duty to carry me directly on to the great
work of sincere repentance for my sins, and laying hold of a Saviour for
life and salvation, to a stated reformation in practice, and obedience to
all God’s commands, and this without any teacher or instructor, I mean
human; so the same plain instruction sufficiently served to the
enlightening this savage creature, and bringing him to be such a
Christian as I have known few equal to him in my life.

As to all the disputes, wrangling, strife, and contention which have
happened in the world about religion, whether niceties in doctrines or
schemes of church government, they were all perfectly useless to us, and,
for aught I can yet see, they have been so to the rest of the world.  We
had the sure guide to heaven, viz. the Word of God; and we had, blessed
be God, comfortable views of the Spirit of God teaching and instructing
by His word, leading us into all truth, and making us both willing and
obedient to the instruction of His word.  And I cannot see the least use
that the greatest knowledge of the disputed points of religion, which
have made such confusion in the world, would have been to us, if we could
have obtained it.  But I must go on with the historical part of things,
and take every part in its order.

After Friday and I became more intimately acquainted, and that he could
understand almost all I said to him, and speak pretty fluently, though in
broken English, to me, I acquainted him with my own history, or at least
so much of it as related to my coming to this place: how I had lived
there, and how long; I let him into the mystery, for such it was to him,
of gunpowder and bullet, and taught him how to shoot.  I gave him a
knife, which he was wonderfully delighted with; and I made him a belt,
with a frog hanging to it, such as in England we wear hangers in; and in
the frog, instead of a hanger, I gave him a hatchet, which was not only
as good a weapon in some cases, but much more useful upon other
occasions.

I described to him the country of Europe, particularly England, which I
came from; how we lived, how we worshipped God, how we behaved to one
another, and how we traded in ships to all parts of the world.  I gave
him an account of the wreck which I had been on board of, and showed him,
as near as I could, the place where she lay; but she was all beaten in
pieces before, and gone.  I showed him the ruins of our boat, which we
lost when we escaped, and which I could not stir with my whole strength
then; but was now fallen almost all to pieces.  Upon seeing this boat,
Friday stood, musing a great while, and said nothing.  I asked him what
it was he studied upon.  At last says he, “Me see such boat like come to
place at my nation.”  I did not understand him a good while; but at last,
when I had examined further into it, I understood by him that a boat,
such as that had been, came on shore upon the country where he lived:
that is, as he explained it, was driven thither by stress of weather.  I
presently imagined that some European ship must have been cast away upon
their coast, and the boat might get loose and drive ashore; but was so
dull that I never once thought of men making their escape from a wreck
thither, much less whence they might come: so I only inquired after a
description of the boat.

Friday described the boat to me well enough; but brought me better to
understand him when he added with some warmth, “We save the white mans
from drown.”  Then I presently asked if there were any white mans, as he
called them, in the boat.  “Yes,” he said; “the boat full of white mans.”
I asked him how many.  He told upon his fingers seventeen.  I asked him
then what became of them.  He told me, “They live, they dwell at my
nation.”

This put new thoughts into my head; for I presently imagined that these
might be the men belonging to the ship that was cast away in the sight of
my island, as I now called it; and who, after the ship was struck on the
rock, and they saw her inevitably lost, had saved themselves in their
boat, and were landed upon that wild shore among the savages.  Upon this
I inquired of him more critically what was become of them.  He assured me
they lived still there; that they had been there about four years; that
the savages left them alone, and gave them victuals to live on.  I asked
him how it came to pass they did not kill them and eat them.  He said,
“No, they make brother with them;” that is, as I understood him, a truce;
and then he added, “They no eat mans but when make the war fight;” that
is to say, they never eat any men but such as come to fight with them and
are taken in battle.

It was after this some considerable time, that being upon the top of the
hill at the east side of the island, from whence, as I have said, I had,
in a clear day, discovered the main or continent of America, Friday, the
weather being very serene, looks very earnestly towards the mainland,
and, in a kind of surprise, falls a jumping and dancing, and calls out to
me, for I was at some distance from him.  I asked him what was the
matter.  “Oh, joy!” says he; “Oh, glad! there see my country, there my
nation!”  I observed an extraordinary sense of pleasure appeared in his
face, and his eyes sparkled, and his countenance discovered a strange
eagerness, as if he had a mind to be in his own country again.  This
observation of mine put a great many thoughts into me, which made me at
first not so easy about my new man Friday as I was before; and I made no
doubt but that, if Friday could get back to his own nation again, he
would not only forget all his religion but all his obligation to me, and
would be forward enough to give his countrymen an account of me, and come
back, perhaps with a hundred or two of them, and make a feast upon me, at
which he might be as merry as he used to be with those of his enemies
when they were taken in war.  But I wronged the poor honest creature very
much, for which I was very sorry afterwards.  However, as my jealousy
increased, and held some weeks, I was a little more circumspect, and not
so familiar and kind to him as before: in which I was certainly wrong
too; the honest, grateful creature having no thought about it but what
consisted with the best principles, both as a religious Christian and as
a grateful friend, as appeared afterwards to my full satisfaction.

While my jealousy of him lasted, you may be sure I was every day pumping
him to see if he would discover any of the new thoughts which I suspected
were in him; but I found everything he said was so honest and so
innocent, that I could find nothing to nourish my suspicion; and in spite
of all my uneasiness, he made me at last entirely his own again; nor did
he in the least perceive that I was uneasy, and therefore I could not
suspect him of deceit.

One day, walking up the same hill, but the weather being hazy at sea, so
that we could not see the continent, I called to him, and said, “Friday,
do not you wish yourself in your own country, your own nation?”  “Yes,”
he said, “I be much O glad to be at my own nation.”  “What would you do
there?” said I.  “Would you turn wild again, eat men’s flesh again, and
be a savage as you were before?”  He looked full of concern, and shaking
his head, said, “No, no, Friday tell them to live good; tell them to pray
God; tell them to eat corn-bread, cattle flesh, milk; no eat man again.”
“Why, then,” said I to him, “they will kill you.”  He looked grave at
that, and then said, “No, no, they no kill me, they willing love learn.”
He meant by this, they would be willing to learn.  He added, they learned
much of the bearded mans that came in the boat.  Then I asked him if he
would go back to them.  He smiled at that, and told me that he could not
swim so far.  I told him I would make a canoe for him.  He told me he
would go if I would go with him.  “I go!” says I; “why, they will eat me
if I come there.”  “No, no,” says he, “me make they no eat you; me make
they much love you.”  He meant, he would tell them how I had killed his
enemies, and saved his life, and so he would make them love me.  Then he
told me, as well as he could, how kind they were to seventeen white men,
or bearded men, as he called them who came on shore there in distress.

From this time, I confess, I had a mind to venture over, and see if I
could possibly join with those bearded men, who I made no doubt were
Spaniards and Portuguese; not doubting but, if I could, we might find
some method to escape from thence, being upon the continent, and a good
company together, better than I could from an island forty miles off the
shore, alone and without help.  So, after some days, I took Friday to
work again by way of discourse, and told him I would give him a boat to
go back to his own nation; and, accordingly, I carried him to my frigate,
which lay on the other side of the island, and having cleared it of water
(for I always kept it sunk in water), I brought it out, showed it him,
and we both went into it.  I found he was a most dexterous fellow at
managing it, and would make it go almost as swift again as I could.  So
when he was in, I said to him, “Well, now, Friday, shall we go to your
nation?”  He looked very dull at my saying so; which it seems was because
he thought the boat was too small to go so far.  I then told him I had a
bigger; so the next day I went to the place where the first boat lay
which I had made, but which I could not get into the water.  He said that
was big enough; but then, as I had taken no care of it, and it had lain
two or three and twenty years there, the sun had so split and dried it,
that it was rotten.  Friday told me such a boat would do very well, and
would carry “much enough vittle, drink, bread;” this was his way of
talking.




CHAPTER XVI—RESCUE OF PRISONERS FROM CANNIBALS


Upon the whole, I was by this time so fixed upon my design of going over
with him to the continent that I told him we would go and make one as big
as that, and he should go home in it.  He answered not one word, but
looked very grave and sad.  I asked him what was the matter with him.  He
asked me again, “Why you angry mad with Friday?—what me done?”  I asked
him what he meant.  I told him I was not angry with him at all.  “No
angry!” says he, repeating the words several times; “why send Friday home
away to my nation?”  “Why,” says I, “Friday, did not you say you wished
you were there?”  “Yes, yes,” says he, “wish we both there; no wish
Friday there, no master there.”  In a word, he would not think of going
there without me.  “I go there, Friday?” says I; “what shall I do there?”
He turned very quick upon me at this.  “You do great deal much good,”
says he; “you teach wild mans be good, sober, tame mans; you tell them
know God, pray God, and live new life.”  “Alas, Friday!” says I, “thou
knowest not what thou sayest; I am but an ignorant man myself.”  “Yes,
yes,” says he, “you teachee me good, you teachee them good.”  “No, no,
Friday,” says I, “you shall go without me; leave me here to live by
myself, as I did before.”  He looked confused again at that word; and
running to one of the hatchets which he used to wear, he takes it up
hastily, and gives it to me.  “What must I do with this?” says I to him.
“You take kill Friday,” says he.  “What must kill you for?” said I again.
He returns very quick—“What you send Friday away for?  Take kill Friday,
no send Friday away.”  This he spoke so earnestly that I saw tears stand
in his eyes.  In a word, I so plainly discovered the utmost affection in
him to me, and a firm resolution in him, that I told him then and often
after, that I would never send him away from me if he was willing to stay
with me.

Upon the whole, as I found by all his discourse a settled affection to
me, and that nothing could part him from me, so I found all the
foundation of his desire to go to his own country was laid in his ardent
affection to the people, and his hopes of my doing them good; a thing
which, as I had no notion of myself, so I had not the least thought or
intention, or desire of undertaking it.  But still I found a strong
inclination to attempting my escape, founded on the supposition gathered
from the discourse, that there were seventeen bearded men there; and
therefore, without any more delay, I went to work with Friday to find out
a great tree proper to fell, and make a large periagua, or canoe, to
undertake the voyage.  There were trees enough in the island to have
built a little fleet, not of periaguas or canoes, but even of good, large
vessels; but the main thing I looked at was, to get one so near the water
that we might launch it when it was made, to avoid the mistake I
committed at first.  At last Friday pitched upon a tree; for I found he
knew much better than I what kind of wood was fittest for it; nor can I
tell to this day what wood to call the tree we cut down, except that it
was very like the tree we call fustic, or between that and the Nicaragua
wood, for it was much of the same colour and smell.  Friday wished to
burn the hollow or cavity of this tree out, to make it for a boat, but I
showed him how to cut it with tools; which, after I had showed him how to
use, he did very handily; and in about a month’s hard labour we finished
it and made it very handsome; especially when, with our axes, which I
showed him how to handle, we cut and hewed the outside into the true
shape of a boat.  After this, however, it cost us near a fortnight’s time
to get her along, as it were inch by inch, upon great rollers into the
water; but when she was in, she would have carried twenty men with great
ease.

When she was in the water, though she was so big, it amazed me to see
with what dexterity and how swift my man Friday could manage her, turn
her, and paddle her along.  So I asked him if he would, and if we might
venture over in her.  “Yes,” he said, “we venture over in her very well,
though great blow wind.”  However I had a further design that he knew
nothing of, and that was, to make a mast and a sail, and to fit her with
an anchor and cable.  As to a mast, that was easy enough to get; so I
pitched upon a straight young cedar-tree, which I found near the place,
and which there were great plenty of in the island, and I set Friday to
work to cut it down, and gave him directions how to shape and order it.
But as to the sail, that was my particular care.  I knew I had old sails,
or rather pieces of old sails, enough; but as I had had them now
six-and-twenty years by me, and had not been very careful to preserve
them, not imagining that I should ever have this kind of use for them, I
did not doubt but they were all rotten; and, indeed, most of them were
so.  However, I found two pieces which appeared pretty good, and with
these I went to work; and with a great deal of pains, and awkward
stitching, you may be sure, for want of needles, I at length made a
three-cornered ugly thing, like what we call in England a
shoulder-of-mutton sail, to go with a boom at bottom, and a little short
sprit at the top, such as usually our ships’ long-boats sail with, and
such as I best knew how to manage, as it was such a one as I had to the
boat in which I made my escape from Barbary, as related in the first part
of my story.

I was near two months performing this last work, viz. rigging and fitting
my masts and sails; for I finished them very complete, making a small
stay, and a sail, or foresail, to it, to assist if we should turn to
windward; and, what was more than all, I fixed a rudder to the stern of
her to steer with.  I was but a bungling shipwright, yet as I knew the
usefulness and even necessity of such a thing, I applied myself with so
much pains to do it, that at last I brought it to pass; though,
considering the many dull contrivances I had for it that failed, I think
it cost me almost as much labour as making the boat.

After all this was done, I had my man Friday to teach as to what belonged
to the navigation of my boat; though he knew very well how to paddle a
canoe, he knew nothing of what belonged to a sail and a rudder; and was
the most amazed when he saw me work the boat to and again in the sea by
the rudder, and how the sail jibed, and filled this way or that way as
the course we sailed changed; I say when he saw this he stood like one
astonished and amazed.  However, with a little use, I made all these
things familiar to him, and he became an expert sailor, except that of
the compass I could make him understand very little.  On the other hand,
as there was very little cloudy weather, and seldom or never any fogs in
those parts, there was the less occasion for a compass, seeing the stars
were always to be seen by night, and the shore by day, except in the
rainy seasons, and then nobody cared to stir abroad either by land or
sea.

I was now entered on the seven-and-twentieth year of my captivity in this
place; though the three last years that I had this creature with me ought
rather to be left out of the account, my habitation being quite of
another kind than in all the rest of the time.  I kept the anniversary of
my landing here with the same thankfulness to God for His mercies as at
first: and if I had such cause of acknowledgment at first, I had much
more so now, having such additional testimonies of the care of Providence
over me, and the great hopes I had of being effectually and speedily
delivered; for I had an invincible impression upon my thoughts that my
deliverance was at hand, and that I should not be another year in this
place.  I went on, however, with my husbandry; digging, planting, and
fencing as usual.  I gathered and cured my grapes, and did every
necessary thing as before.

The rainy season was in the meantime upon me, when I kept more within
doors than at other times.  We had stowed our new vessel as secure as we
could, bringing her up into the creek, where, as I said in the beginning,
I landed my rafts from the ship; and hauling her up to the shore at
high-water mark, I made my man Friday dig a little dock, just big enough
to hold her, and just deep enough to give her water enough to float in;
and then, when the tide was out, we made a strong dam across the end of
it, to keep the water out; and so she lay, dry as to the tide from the
sea: and to keep the rain off we laid a great many boughs of trees, so
thick that she was as well thatched as a house; and thus we waited for
the months of November and December, in which I designed to make my
adventure.

When the settled season began to come in, as the thought of my design
returned with the fair weather, I was preparing daily for the voyage.
And the first thing I did was to lay by a certain quantity of provisions,
being the stores for our voyage; and intended in a week or a fortnight’s
time to open the dock, and launch out our boat.  I was busy one morning
upon something of this kind, when I called to Friday, and bid him to go
to the sea-shore and see if he could find a turtle or a tortoise, a thing
which we generally got once a week, for the sake of the eggs as well as
the flesh.  Friday had not been long gone when he came running back, and
flew over my outer wall or fence, like one that felt not the ground or
the steps he set his foot on; and before I had time to speak to him he
cries out to me, “O master! O master! O sorrow! O bad!”—“What’s the
matter, Friday?” says I.  “O yonder there,” says he, “one, two, three
canoes; one, two, three!”  By this way of speaking I concluded there were
six; but on inquiry I found there were but three.  “Well, Friday,” says
I, “do not be frightened.”  So I heartened him up as well as I could.
However, I saw the poor fellow was most terribly scared, for nothing ran
in his head but that they were come to look for him, and would cut him in
pieces and eat him; and the poor fellow trembled so that I scarcely knew
what to do with him.  I comforted him as well as I could, and told him I
was in as much danger as he, and that they would eat me as well as him.
“But,” says I, “Friday, we must resolve to fight them.  Can you fight,
Friday?”  “Me shoot,” says he, “but there come many great number.”  “No
matter for that,” said I again; “our guns will fright them that we do not
kill.”  So I asked him whether, if I resolved to defend him, he would
defend me, and stand by me, and do just as I bid him.  He said, “Me die
when you bid die, master.”  So I went and fetched a good dram of rum and
gave him; for I had been so good a husband of my rum that I had a great
deal left.  When we had drunk it, I made him take the two fowling-pieces,
which we always carried, and loaded them with large swan-shot, as big as
small pistol-bullets.  Then I took four muskets, and loaded them with two
slugs and five small bullets each; and my two pistols I loaded with a
brace of bullets each.  I hung my great sword, as usual, naked by my
side, and gave Friday his hatchet.  When I had thus prepared myself, I
took my perspective glass, and went up to the side of the hill, to see
what I could discover; and I found quickly by my glass that there were
one-and-twenty savages, three prisoners, and three canoes; and that their
whole business seemed to be the triumphant banquet upon these three human
bodies: a barbarous feast, indeed! but nothing more than, as I had
observed, was usual with them.  I observed also that they had landed, not
where they had done when Friday made his escape, but nearer to my creek,
where the shore was low, and where a thick wood came almost close down to
the sea.  This, with the abhorrence of the inhuman errand these wretches
came about, filled me with such indignation that I came down again to
Friday, and told him I was resolved to go down to them and kill them all;
and asked him if he would stand by me.  He had now got over his fright,
and his spirits being a little raised with the dram I had given him, he
was very cheerful, and told me, as before, he would die when I bid die.

In this fit of fury I divided the arms which I had charged, as before,
between us; I gave Friday one pistol to stick in his girdle, and three
guns upon his shoulder, and I took one pistol and the other three guns
myself; and in this posture we marched out.  I took a small bottle of rum
in my pocket, and gave Friday a large bag with more powder and bullets;
and as to orders, I charged him to keep close behind me, and not to stir,
or shoot, or do anything till I bid him, and in the meantime not to speak
a word.  In this posture I fetched a compass to my right hand of near a
mile, as well to get over the creek as to get into the wood, so that I
could come within shot of them before I should be discovered, which I had
seen by my glass it was easy to do.

While I was making this march, my former thoughts returning, I began to
abate my resolution: I do not mean that I entertained any fear of their
number, for as they were naked, unarmed wretches, it is certain I was
superior to them—nay, though I had been alone.  But it occurred to my
thoughts, what call, what occasion, much less what necessity I was in to
go and dip my hands in blood, to attack people who had neither done or
intended me any wrong? who, as to me, were innocent, and whose barbarous
customs were their own disaster, being in them a token, indeed, of God’s
having left them, with the other nations of that part of the world, to
such stupidity, and to such inhuman courses, but did not call me to take
upon me to be a judge of their actions, much less an executioner of His
justice—that whenever He thought fit He would take the cause into His own
hands, and by national vengeance punish them as a people for national
crimes, but that, in the meantime, it was none of my business—that it was
true Friday might justify it, because he was a declared enemy and in a
state of war with those very particular people, and it was lawful for him
to attack them—but I could not say the same with regard to myself.  These
things were so warmly pressed upon my thoughts all the way as I went,
that I resolved I would only go and place myself near them that I might
observe their barbarous feast, and that I would act then as God should
direct; but that unless something offered that was more a call to me than
yet I knew of, I would not meddle with them.

With this resolution I entered the wood, and, with all possible wariness
and silence, Friday following close at my heels, I marched till I came to
the skirts of the wood on the side which was next to them, only that one
corner of the wood lay between me and them.  Here I called softly to
Friday, and showing him a great tree which was just at the corner of the
wood, I bade him go to the tree, and bring me word if he could see there
plainly what they were doing.  He did so, and came immediately back to
me, and told me they might be plainly viewed there—that they were all
about their fire, eating the flesh of one of their prisoners, and that
another lay bound upon the sand a little from them, whom he said they
would kill next; and this fired the very soul within me.  He told me it
was not one of their nation, but one of the bearded men he had told me
of, that came to their country in the boat.  I was filled with horror at
the very naming of the white bearded man; and going to the tree, I saw
plainly by my glass a white man, who lay upon the beach of the sea with
his hands and his feet tied with flags, or things like rushes, and that
he was an European, and had clothes on.

There was another tree and a little thicket beyond it, about fifty yards
nearer to them than the place where I was, which, by going a little way
about, I saw I might come at undiscovered, and that then I should be
within half a shot of them; so I withheld my passion, though I was indeed
enraged to the highest degree; and going back about twenty paces, I got
behind some bushes, which held all the way till I came to the other tree,
and then came to a little rising ground, which gave me a full view of
them at the distance of about eighty yards.

I had now not a moment to lose, for nineteen of the dreadful wretches sat
upon the ground, all close huddled together, and had just sent the other
two to butcher the poor Christian, and bring him perhaps limb by limb to
their fire, and they were stooping down to untie the bands at his feet.
I turned to Friday.  “Now, Friday,” said I, “do as I bid thee.”  Friday
said he would.  “Then, Friday,” says I, “do exactly as you see me do;
fail in nothing.”  So I set down one of the muskets and the fowling-piece
upon the ground, and Friday did the like by his, and with the other
musket I took my aim at the savages, bidding him to do the like; then
asking him if he was ready, he said, “Yes.”  “Then fire at them,” said I;
and at the same moment I fired also.

Friday took his aim so much better than I, that on the side that he shot
he killed two of them, and wounded three more; and on my side I killed
one, and wounded two.  They were, you may be sure, in a dreadful
consternation: and all of them that were not hurt jumped upon their feet,
but did not immediately know which way to run, or which way to look, for
they knew not from whence their destruction came.  Friday kept his eyes
close upon me, that, as I had bid him, he might observe what I did; so,
as soon as the first shot was made, I threw down the piece, and took up
the fowling-piece, and Friday did the like; he saw me cock and present;
he did the same again.  “Are you ready, Friday?” said I.  “Yes,” says he.
“Let fly, then,” says I, “in the name of God!” and with that I fired
again among the amazed wretches, and so did Friday; and as our pieces
were now loaded with what I call swan-shot, or small pistol-bullets, we
found only two drop; but so many were wounded that they ran about yelling
and screaming like mad creatures, all bloody, and most of them miserably
wounded; whereof three more fell quickly after, though not quite dead.

“Now, Friday,” says I, laying down the discharged pieces, and taking up
the musket which was yet loaded, “follow me,” which he did with a great
deal of courage; upon which I rushed out of the wood and showed myself,
and Friday close at my foot.  As soon as I perceived they saw me, I
shouted as loud as I could, and bade Friday do so too, and running as
fast as I could, which, by the way, was not very fast, being loaded with
arms as I was, I made directly towards the poor victim, who was, as I
said, lying upon the beach or shore, between the place where they sat and
the sea.  The two butchers who were just going to work with him had left
him at the surprise of our first fire, and fled in a terrible fright to
the seaside, and had jumped into a canoe, and three more of the rest made
the same way.  I turned to Friday, and bade him step forwards and fire at
them; he understood me immediately, and running about forty yards, to be
nearer them, he shot at them; and I thought he had killed them all, for I
saw them all fall of a heap into the boat, though I saw two of them up
again quickly; however, he killed two of them, and wounded the third, so
that he lay down in the bottom of the boat as if he had been dead.

While my man Friday fired at them, I pulled out my knife and cut the
flags that bound the poor victim; and loosing his hands and feet, I
lifted him up, and asked him in the Portuguese tongue what he was.  He
answered in Latin, Christianus; but was so weak and faint that he could
scarce stand or speak.  I took my bottle out of my pocket and gave it
him, making signs that he should drink, which he did; and I gave him a
piece of bread, which he ate.  Then I asked him what countryman he was:
and he said, Espagniole; and being a little recovered, let me know, by
all the signs he could possibly make, how much he was in my debt for his
deliverance.  “Seignior,” said I, with as much Spanish as I could make
up, “we will talk afterwards, but we must fight now: if you have any
strength left, take this pistol and sword, and lay about you.”  He took
them very thankfully; and no sooner had he the arms in his hands, but, as
if they had put new vigour into him, he flew upon his murderers like a
fury, and had cut two of them in pieces in an instant; for the truth is,
as the whole was a surprise to them, so the poor creatures were so much
frightened with the noise of our pieces that they fell down for mere
amazement and fear, and had no more power to attempt their own escape
than their flesh had to resist our shot; and that was the case of those
five that Friday shot at in the boat; for as three of them fell with the
hurt they received, so the other two fell with the fright.

I kept my piece in my hand still without firing, being willing to keep my
charge ready, because I had given the Spaniard my pistol and sword: so I
called to Friday, and bade him run up to the tree from whence we first
fired, and fetch the arms which lay there that had been discharged, which
he did with great swiftness; and then giving him my musket, I sat down
myself to load all the rest again, and bade them come to me when they
wanted.  While I was loading these pieces, there happened a fierce
engagement between the Spaniard and one of the savages, who made at him
with one of their great wooden swords, the weapon that was to have killed
him before, if I had not prevented it.  The Spaniard, who was as bold and
brave as could be imagined, though weak, had fought the Indian a good
while, and had cut two great wounds on his head; but the savage being a
stout, lusty fellow, closing in with him, had thrown him down, being
faint, and was wringing my sword out of his hand; when the Spaniard,
though undermost, wisely quitting the sword, drew the pistol from his
girdle, shot the savage through the body, and killed him upon the spot,
before I, who was running to help him, could come near him.

Friday, being now left to his liberty, pursued the flying wretches, with
no weapon in his hand but his hatchet: and with that he despatched those
three who as I said before, were wounded at first, and fallen, and all
the rest he could come up with: and the Spaniard coming to me for a gun,
I gave him one of the fowling-pieces, with which he pursued two of the
savages, and wounded them both; but as he was not able to run, they both
got from him into the wood, where Friday pursued them, and killed one of
them, but the other was too nimble for him; and though he was wounded,
yet had plunged himself into the sea, and swam with all his might off to
those two who were left in the canoe; which three in the canoe, with one
wounded, that we knew not whether he died or no, were all that escaped
our hands of one-and-twenty.  The account of the whole is as follows:
Three killed at our first shot from the tree; two killed at the next
shot; two killed by Friday in the boat; two killed by Friday of those at
first wounded; one killed by Friday in the wood; three killed by the
Spaniard; four killed, being found dropped here and there, of the wounds,
or killed by Friday in his chase of them; four escaped in the boat,
whereof one wounded, if not dead—twenty-one in all.

Those that were in the canoe worked hard to get out of gun-shot, and
though Friday made two or three shots at them, I did not find that he hit
any of them.  Friday would fain have had me take one of their canoes, and
pursue them; and indeed I was very anxious about their escape, lest,
carrying the news home to their people, they should come back perhaps
with two or three hundred of the canoes and devour us by mere multitude;
so I consented to pursue them by sea, and running to one of their canoes,
I jumped in and bade Friday follow me: but when I was in the canoe I was
surprised to find another poor creature lie there, bound hand and foot,
as the Spaniard was, for the slaughter, and almost dead with fear, not
knowing what was the matter; for he had not been able to look up over the
side of the boat, he was tied so hard neck and heels, and had been tied
so long that he had really but little life in him.

I immediately cut the twisted flags or rushes which they had bound him
with, and would have helped him up; but he could not stand or speak, but
groaned most piteously, believing, it seems, still, that he was only
unbound in order to be killed.  When Friday came to him I bade him speak
to him, and tell him of his deliverance; and pulling out my bottle, made
him give the poor wretch a dram, which, with the news of his being
delivered, revived him, and he sat up in the boat.  But when Friday came
to hear him speak, and look in his face, it would have moved any one to
tears to have seen how Friday kissed him, embraced him, hugged him,
cried, laughed, hallooed, jumped about, danced, sang; then cried again,
wrung his hands, beat his own face and head; and then sang and jumped
about again like a distracted creature.  It was a good while before I
could make him speak to me or tell me what was the matter; but when he
came a little to himself he told me that it was his father.

It is not easy for me to express how it moved me to see what ecstasy and
filial affection had worked in this poor savage at the sight of his
father, and of his being delivered from death; nor indeed can I describe
half the extravagances of his affection after this: for he went into the
boat and out of the boat a great many times: when he went in to him he
would sit down by him, open his breast, and hold his father’s head close
to his bosom for many minutes together, to nourish it; then he took his
arms and ankles, which were numbed and stiff with the binding, and chafed
and rubbed them with his hands; and I, perceiving what the case was, gave
him some rum out of my bottle to rub them with, which did them a great
deal of good.

This affair put an end to our pursuit of the canoe with the other
savages, who were now almost out of sight; and it was happy for us that
we did not, for it blew so hard within two hours after, and before they
could be got a quarter of their way, and continued blowing so hard all
night, and that from the north-west, which was against them, that I could
not suppose their boat could live, or that they ever reached their own
coast.

But to return to Friday; he was so busy about his father that I could not
find in my heart to take him off for some time; but after I thought he
could leave him a little, I called him to me, and he came jumping and
laughing, and pleased to the highest extreme: then I asked him if he had
given his father any bread.  He shook his head, and said, “None; ugly dog
eat all up self.”  I then gave him a cake of bread out of a little pouch
I carried on purpose; I also gave him a dram for himself; but he would
not taste it, but carried it to his father.  I had in my pocket two or
three bunches of raisins, so I gave him a handful of them for his father.
He had no sooner given his father these raisins but I saw him come out of
the boat, and run away as if he had been bewitched, for he was the
swiftest fellow on his feet that ever I saw: I say, he ran at such a rate
that he was out of sight, as it were, in an instant; and though I called,
and hallooed out too after him, it was all one—away he went; and in a
quarter of an hour I saw him come back again, though not so fast as he
went; and as he came nearer I found his pace slacker, because he had
something in his hand.  When he came up to me I found he had been quite
home for an earthen jug or pot, to bring his father some fresh water, and
that he had got two more cakes or loaves of bread: the bread he gave me,
but the water he carried to his father; however, as I was very thirsty
too, I took a little of it.  The water revived his father more than all
the rum or spirits I had given him, for he was fainting with thirst.

When his father had drunk, I called to him to know if there was any water
left.  He said, “Yes”; and I bade him give it to the poor Spaniard, who
was in as much want of it as his father; and I sent one of the cakes that
Friday brought to the Spaniard too, who was indeed very weak, and was
reposing himself upon a green place under the shade of a tree; and whose
limbs were also very stiff, and very much swelled with the rude bandage
he had been tied with.  When I saw that upon Friday’s coming to him with
the water he sat up and drank, and took the bread and began to eat, I
went to him and gave him a handful of raisins.  He looked up in my face
with all the tokens of gratitude and thankfulness that could appear in
any countenance; but was so weak, notwithstanding he had so exerted
himself in the fight, that he could not stand up upon his feet—he tried
to do it two or three times, but was really not able, his ankles were so
swelled and so painful to him; so I bade him sit still, and caused Friday
to rub his ankles, and bathe them with rum, as he had done his father’s.

I observed the poor affectionate creature, every two minutes, or perhaps
less, all the while he was here, turn his head about to see if his father
was in the same place and posture as he left him sitting; and at last he
found he was not to be seen; at which he started up, and, without
speaking a word, flew with that swiftness to him that one could scarce
perceive his feet to touch the ground as he went; but when he came, he
only found he had laid himself down to ease his limbs, so Friday came
back to me presently; and then I spoke to the Spaniard to let Friday help
him up if he could, and lead him to the boat, and then he should carry
him to our dwelling, where I would take care of him.  But Friday, a
lusty, strong fellow, took the Spaniard upon his back, and carried him
away to the boat, and set him down softly upon the side or gunnel of the
canoe, with his feet in the inside of it; and then lifting him quite in,
he set him close to his father; and presently stepping out again,
launched the boat off, and paddled it along the shore faster than I could
walk, though the wind blew pretty hard too; so he brought them both safe
into our creek, and leaving them in the boat, ran away to fetch the other
canoe.  As he passed me I spoke to him, and asked him whither he went.
He told me, “Go fetch more boat;” so away he went like the wind, for sure
never man or horse ran like him; and he had the other canoe in the creek
almost as soon as I got to it by land; so he wafted me over, and then
went to help our new guests out of the boat, which he did; but they were
neither of them able to walk; so that poor Friday knew not what to do.

To remedy this, I went to work in my thought, and calling to Friday to
bid them sit down on the bank while he came to me, I soon made a kind of
hand-barrow to lay them on, and Friday and I carried them both up
together upon it between us.

But when we got them to the outside of our wall, or fortification, we
were at a worse loss than before, for it was impossible to get them over,
and I was resolved not to break it down; so I set to work again, and
Friday and I, in about two hours’ time, made a very handsome tent,
covered with old sails, and above that with boughs of trees, being in the
space without our outward fence and between that and the grove of young
wood which I had planted; and here we made them two beds of such things
as I had—viz. of good rice-straw, with blankets laid upon it to lie on,
and another to cover them, on each bed.

My island was now peopled, and I thought myself very rich in subjects;
and it was a merry reflection, which I frequently made, how like a king I
looked.  First of all, the whole country was my own property, so that I
had an undoubted right of dominion.  Secondly, my people were perfectly
subjected—I was absolutely lord and lawgiver—they all owed their lives to
me, and were ready to lay down their lives, if there had been occasion
for it, for me.  It was remarkable, too, I had but three subjects, and
they were of three different religions—my man Friday was a Protestant,
his father was a Pagan and a cannibal, and the Spaniard was a Papist.
However, I allowed liberty of conscience throughout my dominions.  But
this is by the way.

As soon as I had secured my two weak, rescued prisoners, and given them
shelter, and a place to rest them upon, I began to think of making some
provision for them; and the first thing I did, I ordered Friday to take a
yearling goat, betwixt a kid and a goat, out of my particular flock, to
be killed; when I cut off the hinder-quarter, and chopping it into small
pieces, I set Friday to work to boiling and stewing, and made them a very
good dish, I assure you, of flesh and broth; and as I cooked it without
doors, for I made no fire within my inner wall, so I carried it all into
the new tent, and having set a table there for them, I sat down, and ate
my own dinner also with them, and, as well as I could, cheered them and
encouraged them.  Friday was my interpreter, especially to his father,
and, indeed, to the Spaniard too; for the Spaniard spoke the language of
the savages pretty well.

After we had dined, or rather supped, I ordered Friday to take one of the
canoes, and go and fetch our muskets and other firearms, which, for want
of time, we had left upon the place of battle; and the next day I ordered
him to go and bury the dead bodies of the savages, which lay open to the
sun, and would presently be offensive.  I also ordered him to bury the
horrid remains of their barbarous feast, which I could not think of doing
myself; nay, I could not bear to see them if I went that way; all which
he punctually performed, and effaced the very appearance of the savages
being there; so that when I went again, I could scarce know where it was,
otherwise than by the corner of the wood pointing to the place.

I then began to enter into a little conversation with my two new
subjects; and, first, I set Friday to inquire of his father what he
thought of the escape of the savages in that canoe, and whether we might
expect a return of them, with a power too great for us to resist.  His
first opinion was, that the savages in the boat never could live out the
storm which blew that night they went off, but must of necessity be
drowned, or driven south to those other shores, where they were as sure
to be devoured as they were to be drowned if they were cast away; but, as
to what they would do if they came safe on shore, he said he knew not;
but it was his opinion that they were so dreadfully frightened with the
manner of their being attacked, the noise, and the fire, that he believed
they would tell the people they were all killed by thunder and lightning,
not by the hand of man; and that the two which appeared—viz. Friday and
I—were two heavenly spirits, or furies, come down to destroy them, and
not men with weapons.  This, he said, he knew; because he heard them all
cry out so, in their language, one to another; for it was impossible for
them to conceive that a man could dart fire, and speak thunder, and kill
at a distance, without lifting up the hand, as was done now: and this old
savage was in the right; for, as I understood since, by other hands, the
savages never attempted to go over to the island afterwards, they were so
terrified with the accounts given by those four men (for it seems they
did escape the sea), that they believed whoever went to that enchanted
island would be destroyed with fire from the gods.  This, however, I knew
not; and therefore was under continual apprehensions for a good while,
and kept always upon my guard, with all my army: for, as there were now
four of us, I would have ventured upon a hundred of them, fairly in the
open field, at any time.




CHAPTER XVII—VISIT OF MUTINEERS


In a little time, however, no more canoes appearing, the fear of their
coming wore off; and I began to take my former thoughts of a voyage to
the main into consideration; being likewise assured by Friday’s father
that I might depend upon good usage from their nation, on his account, if
I would go.  But my thoughts were a little suspended when I had a serious
discourse with the Spaniard, and when I understood that there were
sixteen more of his countrymen and Portuguese, who having been cast away
and made their escape to that side, lived there at peace, indeed, with
the savages, but were very sore put to it for necessaries, and, indeed,
for life.  I asked him all the particulars of their voyage, and found
they were a Spanish ship, bound from the Rio de la Plata to the Havanna,
being directed to leave their loading there, which was chiefly hides and
silver, and to bring back what European goods they could meet with there;
that they had five Portuguese seamen on board, whom they took out of
another wreck; that five of their own men were drowned when first the
ship was lost, and that these escaped through infinite dangers and
hazards, and arrived, almost starved, on the cannibal coast, where they
expected to have been devoured every moment.  He told me they had some
arms with them, but they were perfectly useless, for that they had
neither powder nor ball, the washing of the sea having spoiled all their
powder but a little, which they used at their first landing to provide
themselves with some food.

I asked him what he thought would become of them there, and if they had
formed any design of making their escape.  He said they had many
consultations about it; but that having neither vessel nor tools to build
one, nor provisions of any kind, their councils always ended in tears and
despair.  I asked him how he thought they would receive a proposal from
me, which might tend towards an escape; and whether, if they were all
here, it might not be done.  I told him with freedom, I feared mostly
their treachery and ill-usage of me, if I put my life in their hands; for
that gratitude was no inherent virtue in the nature of man, nor did men
always square their dealings by the obligations they had received so much
as they did by the advantages they expected.  I told him it would be very
hard that I should be made the instrument of their deliverance, and that
they should afterwards make me their prisoner in New Spain, where an
Englishman was certain to be made a sacrifice, what necessity or what
accident soever brought him thither; and that I had rather be delivered
up to the savages, and be devoured alive, than fall into the merciless
claws of the priests, and be carried into the Inquisition.  I added that,
otherwise, I was persuaded, if they were all here, we might, with so many
hands, build a barque large enough to carry us all away, either to the
Brazils southward, or to the islands or Spanish coast northward; but that
if, in requital, they should, when I had put weapons into their hands,
carry me by force among their own people, I might be ill-used for my
kindness to them, and make my case worse than it was before.

He answered, with a great deal of candour and ingenuousness, that their
condition was so miserable, and that they were so sensible of it, that he
believed they would abhor the thought of using any man unkindly that
should contribute to their deliverance; and that, if I pleased, he would
go to them with the old man, and discourse with them about it, and return
again and bring me their answer; that he would make conditions with them
upon their solemn oath, that they should be absolutely under my direction
as their commander and captain; and they should swear upon the holy
sacraments and gospel to be true to me, and go to such Christian country
as I should agree to, and no other; and to be directed wholly and
absolutely by my orders till they were landed safely in such country as I
intended, and that he would bring a contract from them, under their
hands, for that purpose.  Then he told me he would first swear to me
himself that he would never stir from me as long as he lived till I gave
him orders; and that he would take my side to the last drop of his blood,
if there should happen the least breach of faith among his countrymen.
He told me they were all of them very civil, honest men, and they were
under the greatest distress imaginable, having neither weapons nor
clothes, nor any food, but at the mercy and discretion of the savages;
out of all hopes of ever returning to their own country; and that he was
sure, if I would undertake their relief, they would live and die by me.

Upon these assurances, I resolved to venture to relieve them, if
possible, and to send the old savage and this Spaniard over to them to
treat.  But when we had got all things in readiness to go, the Spaniard
himself started an objection, which had so much prudence in it on one
hand, and so much sincerity on the other hand, that I could not but be
very well satisfied in it; and, by his advice, put off the deliverance of
his comrades for at least half a year.  The case was thus: he had been
with us now about a month, during which time I had let him see in what
manner I had provided, with the assistance of Providence, for my support;
and he saw evidently what stock of corn and rice I had laid up; which,
though it was more than sufficient for myself, yet it was not sufficient,
without good husbandry, for my family, now it was increased to four; but
much less would it be sufficient if his countrymen, who were, as he said,
sixteen, still alive, should come over; and least of all would it be
sufficient to victual our vessel, if we should build one, for a voyage to
any of the Christian colonies of America; so he told me he thought it
would be more advisable to let him and the other two dig and cultivate
some more land, as much as I could spare seed to sow, and that we should
wait another harvest, that we might have a supply of corn for his
countrymen, when they should come; for want might be a temptation to them
to disagree, or not to think themselves delivered, otherwise than out of
one difficulty into another.  “You know,” says he, “the children of
Israel, though they rejoiced at first for their being delivered out of
Egypt, yet rebelled even against God Himself, that delivered them, when
they came to want bread in the wilderness.”

His caution was so seasonable, and his advice so good, that I could not
but be very well pleased with his proposal, as well as I was satisfied
with his fidelity; so we fell to digging, all four of us, as well as the
wooden tools we were furnished with permitted; and in about a month’s
time, by the end of which it was seed-time, we had got as much land cured
and trimmed up as we sowed two-and-twenty bushels of barley on, and
sixteen jars of rice, which was, in short, all the seed we had to spare:
indeed, we left ourselves barely sufficient, for our own food for the six
months that we had to expect our crop; that is to say reckoning from the
time we set our seed aside for sowing; for it is not to be supposed it is
six months in the ground in that country.

Having now society enough, and our numbers being sufficient to put us out
of fear of the savages, if they had come, unless their number had been
very great, we went freely all over the island, whenever we found
occasion; and as we had our escape or deliverance upon our thoughts, it
was impossible, at least for me, to have the means of it out of mine.
For this purpose I marked out several trees, which I thought fit for our
work, and I set Friday and his father to cut them down; and then I caused
the Spaniard, to whom I imparted my thoughts on that affair, to oversee
and direct their work.  I showed them with what indefatigable pains I had
hewed a large tree into single planks, and I caused them to do the like,
till they made about a dozen large planks, of good oak, near two feet
broad, thirty-five feet long, and from two inches to four inches thick:
what prodigious labour it took up any one may imagine.

At the same time I contrived to increase my little flock of tame goats as
much as I could; and for this purpose I made Friday and the Spaniard go
out one day, and myself with Friday the next day (for we took our turns),
and by this means we got about twenty young kids to breed up with the
rest; for whenever we shot the dam, we saved the kids, and added them to
our flock.  But above all, the season for curing the grapes coming on, I
caused such a prodigious quantity to be hung up in the sun, that, I
believe, had we been at Alicant, where the raisins of the sun are cured,
we could have filled sixty or eighty barrels; and these, with our bread,
formed a great part of our food—very good living too, I assure you, for
they are exceedingly nourishing.

It was now harvest, and our crop in good order: it was not the most
plentiful increase I had seen in the island, but, however, it was enough
to answer our end; for from twenty-two bushels of barley we brought in
and thrashed out above two hundred and twenty bushels; and the like in
proportion of the rice; which was store enough for our food to the next
harvest, though all the sixteen Spaniards had been on shore with me; or,
if we had been ready for a voyage, it would very plentifully have
victualled our ship to have carried us to any part of the world; that is
to say, any part of America.  When we had thus housed and secured our
magazine of corn, we fell to work to make more wicker-ware, viz. great
baskets, in which we kept it; and the Spaniard was very handy and
dexterous at this part, and often blamed me that I did not make some
things for defence of this kind of work; but I saw no need of it.

And now, having a full supply of food for all the guests I expected, I
gave the Spaniard leave to go over to the main, to see what he could do
with those he had left behind him there.  I gave him a strict charge not
to bring any man who would not first swear in the presence of himself and
the old savage that he would in no way injure, fight with, or attack the
person he should find in the island, who was so kind as to send for them
in order to their deliverance; but that they would stand by him and
defend him against all such attempts, and wherever they went would be
entirely under and subjected to his command; and that this should be put
in writing, and signed in their hands.  How they were to have done this,
when I knew they had neither pen nor ink, was a question which we never
asked.  Under these instructions, the Spaniard and the old savage, the
father of Friday, went away in one of the canoes which they might be said
to have come in, or rather were brought in, when they came as prisoners
to be devoured by the savages.  I gave each of them a musket, with a
firelock on it, and about eight charges of powder and ball, charging them
to be very good husbands of both, and not to use either of them but upon
urgent occasions.

This was a cheerful work, being the first measures used by me in view of
my deliverance for now twenty-seven years and some days.  I gave them
provisions of bread and of dried grapes, sufficient for themselves for
many days, and sufficient for all the Spaniards—for about eight days’
time; and wishing them a good voyage, I saw them go, agreeing with them
about a signal they should hang out at their return, by which I should
know them again when they came back, at a distance, before they came on
shore.  They went away with a fair gale on the day that the moon was at
full, by my account in the month of October; but as for an exact
reckoning of days, after I had once lost it I could never recover it
again; nor had I kept even the number of years so punctually as to be
sure I was right; though, as it proved when I afterwards examined my
account, I found I had kept a true reckoning of years.

It was no less than eight days I had waited for them, when a strange and
unforeseen accident intervened, of which the like has not, perhaps, been
heard of in history.  I was fast asleep in my hutch one morning, when my
man Friday came running in to me, and called aloud, “Master, master, they
are come, they are come!”  I jumped up, and regardless of danger I went,
as soon as I could get my clothes on, through my little grove, which, by
the way, was by this time grown to be a very thick wood; I say,
regardless of danger I went without my arms, which was not my custom to
do; but I was surprised when, turning my eyes to the sea, I presently saw
a boat at about a league and a half distance, standing in for the shore,
with a shoulder-of-mutton sail, as they call it, and the wind blowing
pretty fair to bring them in: also I observed, presently, that they did
not come from that side which the shore lay on, but from the southernmost
end of the island.  Upon this I called Friday in, and bade him lie close,
for these were not the people we looked for, and that we might not know
yet whether they were friends or enemies.  In the next place I went in to
fetch my perspective glass to see what I could make of them; and having
taken the ladder out, I climbed up to the top of the hill, as I used to
do when I was apprehensive of anything, and to take my view the plainer
without being discovered.  I had scarce set my foot upon the hill when my
eye plainly discovered a ship lying at anchor, at about two leagues and a
half distance from me, SSE., but not above a league and a half from the
shore.  By my observation it appeared plainly to be an English ship, and
the boat appeared to be an English long-boat.

I cannot express the confusion I was in, though the joy of seeing a ship,
and one that I had reason to believe was manned by my own countrymen, and
consequently friends, was such as I cannot describe; but yet I had some
secret doubts hung about me—I cannot tell from whence they came—bidding
me keep upon my guard.  In the first place, it occurred to me to consider
what business an English ship could have in that part of the world, since
it was not the way to or from any part of the world where the English had
any traffic; and I knew there had been no storms to drive them in there
in distress; and that if they were really English it was most probable
that they were here upon no good design; and that I had better continue
as I was than fall into the hands of thieves and murderers.

Let no man despise the secret hints and notices of danger which sometimes
are given him when he may think there is no possibility of its being
real.  That such hints and notices are given us I believe few that have
made any observation of things can deny; that they are certain
discoveries of an invisible world, and a converse of spirits, we cannot
doubt; and if the tendency of them seems to be to warn us of danger, why
should we not suppose they are from some friendly agent (whether supreme,
or inferior and subordinate, is not the question), and that they are
given for our good?

The present question abundantly confirms me in the justice of this
reasoning; for had I not been made cautious by this secret admonition,
come it from whence it will, I had been done inevitably, and in a far
worse condition than before, as you will see presently.  I had not kept
myself long in this posture till I saw the boat draw near the shore, as
if they looked for a creek to thrust in at, for the convenience of
landing; however, as they did not come quite far enough, they did not see
the little inlet where I formerly landed my rafts, but ran their boat on
shore upon the beach, at about half a mile from me, which was very happy
for me; for otherwise they would have landed just at my door, as I may
say, and would soon have beaten me out of my castle, and perhaps have
plundered me of all I had.  When they were on shore I was fully satisfied
they were Englishmen, at least most of them; one or two I thought were
Dutch, but it did not prove so; there were in all eleven men, whereof
three of them I found were unarmed and, as I thought, bound; and when the
first four or five of them were jumped on shore, they took those three
out of the boat as prisoners: one of the three I could perceive using the
most passionate gestures of entreaty, affliction, and despair, even to a
kind of extravagance; the other two, I could perceive, lifted up their
hands sometimes, and appeared concerned indeed, but not to such a degree
as the first.  I was perfectly confounded at the sight, and knew not what
the meaning of it should be.  Friday called out to me in English, as well
as he could, “O master! you see English mans eat prisoner as well as
savage mans.”  “Why, Friday,” says I, “do you think they are going to eat
them, then?”  “Yes,” says Friday, “they will eat them.”  “No no,” says I,
“Friday; I am afraid they will murder them, indeed; but you may be sure
they will not eat them.”

All this while I had no thought of what the matter really was, but stood
trembling with the horror of the sight, expecting every moment when the
three prisoners should be killed; nay, once I saw one of the villains
lift up his arm with a great cutlass, as the seamen call it, or sword, to
strike one of the poor men; and I expected to see him fall every moment;
at which all the blood in my body seemed to run chill in my veins.  I
wished heartily now for the Spaniard, and the savage that had gone with
him, or that I had any way to have come undiscovered within shot of them,
that I might have secured the three men, for I saw no firearms they had
among them; but it fell out to my mind another way.  After I had observed
the outrageous usage of the three men by the insolent seamen, I observed
the fellows run scattering about the island, as if they wanted to see the
country.  I observed that the three other men had liberty to go also
where they pleased; but they sat down all three upon the ground, very
pensive, and looked like men in despair.  This put me in mind of the
first time when I came on shore, and began to look about me; how I gave
myself over for lost; how wildly I looked round me; what dreadful
apprehensions I had; and how I lodged in the tree all night for fear of
being devoured by wild beasts.  As I knew nothing that night of the
supply I was to receive by the providential driving of the ship nearer
the land by the storms and tide, by which I have since been so long
nourished and supported; so these three poor desolate men knew nothing
how certain of deliverance and supply they were, how near it was to them,
and how effectually and really they were in a condition of safety, at the
same time that they thought themselves lost and their case desperate.  So
little do we see before us in the world, and so much reason have we to
depend cheerfully upon the great Maker of the world, that He does not
leave His creatures so absolutely destitute, but that in the worst
circumstances they have always something to be thankful for, and
sometimes are nearer deliverance than they imagine; nay, are even brought
to their deliverance by the means by which they seem to be brought to
their destruction.

It was just at high-water when these people came on shore; and while they
rambled about to see what kind of a place they were in, they had
carelessly stayed till the tide was spent, and the water was ebbed
considerably away, leaving their boat aground.  They had left two men in
the boat, who, as I found afterwards, having drunk a little too much
brandy, fell asleep; however, one of them waking a little sooner than the
other and finding the boat too fast aground for him to stir it, hallooed
out for the rest, who were straggling about: upon which they all soon
came to the boat: but it was past all their strength to launch her, the
boat being very heavy, and the shore on that side being a soft oozy sand,
almost like a quicksand.  In this condition, like true seamen, who are,
perhaps, the least of all mankind given to forethought, they gave it
over, and away they strolled about the country again; and I heard one of
them say aloud to another, calling them off from the boat, “Why, let her
alone, Jack, can’t you? she’ll float next tide;” by which I was fully
confirmed in the main inquiry of what countrymen they were.  All this
while I kept myself very close, not once daring to stir out of my castle
any farther than to my place of observation near the top of the hill: and
very glad I was to think how well it was fortified.  I knew it was no
less than ten hours before the boat could float again, and by that time
it would be dark, and I might be at more liberty to see their motions,
and to hear their discourse, if they had any.  In the meantime I fitted
myself up for a battle as before, though with more caution, knowing I had
to do with another kind of enemy than I had at first.  I ordered Friday
also, whom I had made an excellent marksman with his gun, to load himself
with arms.  I took myself two fowling-pieces, and I gave him three
muskets.  My figure, indeed, was very fierce; I had my formidable
goat-skin coat on, with the great cap I have mentioned, a naked sword by
my side, two pistols in my belt, and a gun upon each shoulder.

It was my design, as I said above, not to have made any attempt till it
was dark; but about two o’clock, being the heat of the day, I found that
they were all gone straggling into the woods, and, as I thought, laid
down to sleep.  The three poor distressed men, too anxious for their
condition to get any sleep, had, however, sat down under the shelter of a
great tree, at about a quarter of a mile from me, and, as I thought, out
of sight of any of the rest.  Upon this I resolved to discover myself to
them, and learn something of their condition; immediately I marched as
above, my man Friday at a good distance behind me, as formidable for his
arms as I, but not making quite so staring a spectre-like figure as I
did.  I came as near them undiscovered as I could, and then, before any
of them saw me, I called aloud to them in Spanish, “What are ye,
gentlemen?”  They started up at the noise, but were ten times more
confounded when they saw me, and the uncouth figure that I made.  They
made no answer at all, but I thought I perceived them just going to fly
from me, when I spoke to them in English. “Gentlemen,” said I, “do not be
surprised at me; perhaps you may have a friend near when you did not
expect it.”  “He must be sent directly from heaven then,” said one of
them very gravely to me, and pulling off his hat at the same time to me;
“for our condition is past the help of man.”  “All help is from heaven,
sir,” said I, “but can you put a stranger in the way to help you? for you
seem to be in some great distress.  I saw you when you landed; and when
you seemed to make application to the brutes that came with you, I saw
one of them lift up his sword to kill you.”

The poor man, with tears running down his face, and trembling, looking
like one astonished, returned, “Am I talking to God or man?  Is it a real
man or an angel?”  “Be in no fear about that, sir,” said I; “if God had
sent an angel to relieve you, he would have come better clothed, and
armed after another manner than you see me; pray lay aside your fears; I
am a man, an Englishman, and disposed to assist you; you see I have one
servant only; we have arms and ammunition; tell us freely, can we serve
you?  What is your case?”  “Our case, sir,” said he, “is too long to tell
you while our murderers are so near us; but, in short, sir, I was
commander of that ship—my men have mutinied against me; they have been
hardly prevailed on not to murder me, and, at last, have set me on shore
in this desolate place, with these two men with me—one my mate, the other
a passenger—where we expected to perish, believing the place to be
uninhabited, and know not yet what to think of it.”  “Where are these
brutes, your enemies?” said I; “do you know where they are gone?  There
they lie, sir,” said he, pointing to a thicket of trees; “my heart
trembles for fear they have seen us and heard you speak; if they have,
they will certainly murder us all.”  “Have they any firearms?” said I.
He answered, “They had only two pieces, one of which they left in the
boat.”  “Well, then,” said I, “leave the rest to me; I see they are all
asleep; it is an easy thing to kill them all; but shall we rather take
them prisoners?”  He told me there were two desperate villains among them
that it was scarce safe to show any mercy to; but if they were secured,
he believed all the rest would return to their duty.  I asked him which
they were.  He told me he could not at that distance distinguish them,
but he would obey my orders in anything I would direct.  “Well,” says I,
“let us retreat out of their view or hearing, lest they awake, and we
will resolve further.”  So they willingly went back with me, till the
woods covered us from them.

“Look you, sir,” said I, “if I venture upon your deliverance, are you
willing to make two conditions with me?”  He anticipated my proposals by
telling me that both he and the ship, if recovered, should be wholly
directed and commanded by me in everything; and if the ship was not
recovered, he would live and die with me in what part of the world soever
I would send him; and the two other men said the same.  “Well,” says I,
“my conditions are but two; first, that while you stay in this island
with me, you will not pretend to any authority here; and if I put arms in
your hands, you will, upon all occasions, give them up to me, and do no
prejudice to me or mine upon this island, and in the meantime be governed
by my orders; secondly, that if the ship is or may be recovered, you will
carry me and my man to England passage free.”

He gave me all the assurances that the invention or faith of man could
devise that he would comply with these most reasonable demands, and
besides would owe his life to me, and acknowledge it upon all occasions
as long as he lived.  “Well, then,” said I, “here are three muskets for
you, with powder and ball; tell me next what you think is proper to be
done.”  He showed all the testimonies of his gratitude that he was able,
but offered to be wholly guided by me.  I told him I thought it was very
hard venturing anything; but the best method I could think of was to fire
on them at once as they lay, and if any were not killed at the first
volley, and offered to submit, we might save them, and so put it wholly
upon God’s providence to direct the shot.  He said, very modestly, that
he was loath to kill them if he could help it; but that those two were
incorrigible villains, and had been the authors of all the mutiny in the
ship, and if they escaped, we should be undone still, for they would go
on board and bring the whole ship’s company, and destroy us all.  “Well,
then,” says I, “necessity legitimates my advice, for it is the only way
to save our lives.”  However, seeing him still cautious of shedding
blood, I told him they should go themselves, and manage as they found
convenient.

In the middle of this discourse we heard some of them awake, and soon
after we saw two of them on their feet.  I asked him if either of them
were the heads of the mutiny?  He said, “No.”  “Well, then,” said I, “you
may let them escape; and Providence seems to have awakened them on
purpose to save themselves.  Now,” says I, “if the rest escape you, it is
your fault.”  Animated with this, he took the musket I had given him in
his hand, and a pistol in his belt, and his two comrades with him, with
each a piece in his hand; the two men who were with him going first made
some noise, at which one of the seamen who was awake turned about, and
seeing them coming, cried out to the rest; but was too late then, for the
moment he cried out they fired—I mean the two men, the captain wisely
reserving his own piece.  They had so well aimed their shot at the men
they knew, that one of them was killed on the spot, and the other very
much wounded; but not being dead, he started up on his feet, and called
eagerly for help to the other; but the captain stepping to him, told him
it was too late to cry for help, he should call upon God to forgive his
villainy, and with that word knocked him down with the stock of his
musket, so that he never spoke more; there were three more in the
company, and one of them was slightly wounded.  By this time I was come;
and when they saw their danger, and that it was in vain to resist, they
begged for mercy.  The captain told them he would spare their lives if
they would give him an assurance of their abhorrence of the treachery
they had been guilty of, and would swear to be faithful to him in
recovering the ship, and afterwards in carrying her back to Jamaica, from
whence they came.  They gave him all the protestations of their sincerity
that could be desired; and he was willing to believe them, and spare
their lives, which I was not against, only that I obliged him to keep
them bound hand and foot while they were on the island.

While this was doing, I sent Friday with the captain’s mate to the boat
with orders to secure her, and bring away the oars and sails, which they
did; and by-and-by three straggling men, that were (happily for them)
parted from the rest, came back upon hearing the guns fired; and seeing
the captain, who was before their prisoner, now their conqueror, they
submitted to be bound also; and so our victory was complete.

It now remained that the captain and I should inquire into one another’s
circumstances.  I began first, and told him my whole history, which he
heard with an attention even to amazement—and particularly at the
wonderful manner of my being furnished with provisions and ammunition;
and, indeed, as my story is a whole collection of wonders, it affected
him deeply.  But when he reflected from thence upon himself, and how I
seemed to have been preserved there on purpose to save his life, the
tears ran down his face, and he could not speak a word more.  After this
communication was at an end, I carried him and his two men into my
apartment, leading them in just where I came out, viz. at the top of the
house, where I refreshed them with such provisions as I had, and showed
them all the contrivances I had made during my long, long inhabiting that
place.

All I showed them, all I said to them, was perfectly amazing; but above
all, the captain admired my fortification, and how perfectly I had
concealed my retreat with a grove of trees, which having been now planted
nearly twenty years, and the trees growing much faster than in England,
was become a little wood, so thick that it was impassable in any part of
it but at that one side where I had reserved my little winding passage
into it.  I told him this was my castle and my residence, but that I had
a seat in the country, as most princes have, whither I could retreat upon
occasion, and I would show him that too another time; but at present our
business was to consider how to recover the ship.  He agreed with me as
to that, but told me he was perfectly at a loss what measures to take,
for that there were still six-and-twenty hands on board, who, having
entered into a cursed conspiracy, by which they had all forfeited their
lives to the law, would be hardened in it now by desperation, and would
carry it on, knowing that if they were subdued they would be brought to
the gallows as soon as they came to England, or to any of the English
colonies, and that, therefore, there would be no attacking them with so
small a number as we were.

I mused for some time on what he had said, and found it was a very
rational conclusion, and that therefore something was to be resolved on
speedily, as well to draw the men on board into some snare for their
surprise as to prevent their landing upon us, and destroying us.  Upon
this, it presently occurred to me that in a little while the ship’s crew,
wondering what was become of their comrades and of the boat, would
certainly come on shore in their other boat to look for them, and that
then, perhaps, they might come armed, and be too strong for us: this he
allowed to be rational.  Upon this, I told him the first thing we had to
do was to stave the boat which lay upon the beach, so that they might not
carry her of, and taking everything out of her, leave her so far useless
as not to be fit to swim.  Accordingly, we went on board, took the arms
which were left on board out of her, and whatever else we found
there—which was a bottle of brandy, and another of rum, a few
biscuit-cakes, a horn of powder, and a great lump of sugar in a piece of
canvas (the sugar was five or six pounds): all which was very welcome to
me, especially the brandy and sugar, of which I had had none left for
many years.

When we had carried all these things on shore (the oars, mast, sail, and
rudder of the boat were carried away before), we knocked a great hole in
her bottom, that if they had come strong enough to master us, yet they
could not carry off the boat.  Indeed, it was not much in my thoughts
that we could be able to recover the ship; but my view was, that if they
went away without the boat, I did not much question to make her again fit
to carry as to the Leeward Islands, and call upon our friends the
Spaniards in my way, for I had them still in my thoughts.




CHAPTER XVIII—THE SHIP RECOVERED


While we were thus preparing our designs, and had first, by main
strength, heaved the boat upon the beach, so high that the tide would not
float her off at high-water mark, and besides, had broke a hole in her
bottom too big to be quickly stopped, and were set down musing what we
should do, we heard the ship fire a gun, and make a waft with her ensign
as a signal for the boat to come on board—but no boat stirred; and they
fired several times, making other signals for the boat.  At last, when
all their signals and firing proved fruitless, and they found the boat
did not stir, we saw them, by the help of my glasses, hoist another boat
out and row towards the shore; and we found, as they approached, that
there were no less than ten men in her, and that they had firearms with
them.

As the ship lay almost two leagues from the shore, we had a full view of
them as they came, and a plain sight even of their faces; because the
tide having set them a little to the east of the other boat, they rowed
up under shore, to come to the same place where the other had landed, and
where the boat lay; by this means, I say, we had a full view of them, and
the captain knew the persons and characters of all the men in the boat,
of whom, he said, there were three very honest fellows, who, he was sure,
were led into this conspiracy by the rest, being over-powered and
frightened; but that as for the boatswain, who it seems was the chief
officer among them, and all the rest, they were as outrageous as any of
the ship’s crew, and were no doubt made desperate in their new
enterprise; and terribly apprehensive he was that they would be too
powerful for us.  I smiled at him, and told him that men in our
circumstances were past the operation of fear; that seeing almost every
condition that could be was better than that which we were supposed to be
in, we ought to expect that the consequence, whether death or life, would
be sure to be a deliverance.  I asked him what he thought of the
circumstances of my life, and whether a deliverance were not worth
venturing for?  “And where, sir,” said I, “is your belief of my being
preserved here on purpose to save your life, which elevated you a little
while ago?  For my part,” said I, “there seems to be but one thing amiss
in all the prospect of it.”  “What is that?” say he.  “Why,” said I, “it
is, that as you say there are three or four honest fellows among them
which should be spared, had they been all of the wicked part of the crew
I should have thought God’s providence had singled them out to deliver
them into your hands; for depend upon it, every man that comes ashore is
our own, and shall die or live as they behave to us.”  As I spoke this
with a raised voice and cheerful countenance, I found it greatly
encouraged him; so we set vigorously to our business.

We had, upon the first appearance of the boat’s coming from the ship,
considered of separating our prisoners; and we had, indeed, secured them
effectually.  Two of them, of whom the captain was less assured than
ordinary, I sent with Friday, and one of the three delivered men, to my
cave, where they were remote enough, and out of danger of being heard or
discovered, or of finding their way out of the woods if they could have
delivered themselves.  Here they left them bound, but gave them
provisions; and promised them, if they continued there quietly, to give
them their liberty in a day or two; but that if they attempted their
escape they should be put to death without mercy.  They promised
faithfully to bear their confinement with patience, and were very
thankful that they had such good usage as to have provisions and light
left them; for Friday gave them candles (such as we made ourselves) for
their comfort; and they did not know but that he stood sentinel over them
at the entrance.

The other prisoners had better usage; two of them were kept pinioned,
indeed, because the captain was not able to trust them; but the other two
were taken into my service, upon the captain’s recommendation, and upon
their solemnly engaging to live and die with us; so with them and the
three honest men we were seven men, well armed; and I made no doubt we
should be able to deal well enough with the ten that were coming,
considering that the captain had said there were three or four honest men
among them also.  As soon as they got to the place where their other boat
lay, they ran their boat into the beach and came all on shore, hauling
the boat up after them, which I was glad to see, for I was afraid they
would rather have left the boat at an anchor some distance from the
shore, with some hands in her to guard her, and so we should not be able
to seize the boat.  Being on shore, the first thing they did, they ran
all to their other boat; and it was easy to see they were under a great
surprise to find her stripped, as above, of all that was in her, and a
great hole in her bottom.  After they had mused a while upon this, they
set up two or three great shouts, hallooing with all their might, to try
if they could make their companions hear; but all was to no purpose.
Then they came all close in a ring, and fired a volley of their small
arms, which indeed we heard, and the echoes made the woods ring.  But it
was all one; those in the cave, we were sure, could not hear; and those
in our keeping, though they heard it well enough, yet durst give no
answer to them.  They were so astonished at the surprise of this, that,
as they told us afterwards, they resolved to go all on board again to
their ship, and let them know that the men were all murdered, and the
long-boat staved; accordingly, they immediately launched their boat
again, and got all of them on board.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captain’s mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captain’s mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
aware—one of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captain’s mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, “Tom Smith!  Tom Smith!”  Tom Smith answered
immediately, “Is that Robinson?” for it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, “Ay, ay; for God’s sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.”  “Who must we yield to?
Where are they?” says Smith again.  “Here they are,” says he; “here’s our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.”  “Will they give us quarter, then?”
says Tom Smith, “and we will yield.”  “I’ll go and ask, if you promise to
yield,” said Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, “You, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.”

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, “For God’s sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:” which, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governor’s mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commander’s of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for God’s
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, “Captain, the commander
calls for you;” and presently the captain replied, “Tell his excellency I
am just coming.”  This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governor’s engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  “Well,” says the captain, “I must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.”  So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captain’s motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governor’s pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the ship’s side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two o’clock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of “Governor!  Governor!” and presently I knew the captain’s
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, “My dear friend and
deliverer,” says he, “there’s your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.”  I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the ship’s beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

After these ceremonies were past, and after all his good things were
brought into my little apartment, we began to consult what was to be done
with the prisoners we had; for it was worth considering whether we might
venture to take them with us or no, especially two of them, whom he knew
to be incorrigible and refractory to the last degree; and the captain
said he knew they were such rogues that there was no obliging them, and
if he did carry them away, it must be in irons, as malefactors, to be
delivered over to justice at the first English colony he could come to;
and I found that the captain himself was very anxious about it.  Upon
this, I told him that, if he desired it, I would undertake to bring the
two men he spoke of to make it their own request that he should leave
them upon the island.  “I should be very glad of that,” says the captain,
“with all my heart.”  “Well,” says I, “I will send for them up and talk
with them for you.”  So I caused Friday and the two hostages, for they
were now discharged, their comrades having performed their promise; I
say, I caused them to go to the cave, and bring up the five men, pinioned
as they were, to the bower, and keep them there till I came.  After some
time, I came thither dressed in my new habit; and now I was called
governor again.  Being all met, and the captain with me, I caused the men
to be brought before me, and I told them I had got a full account of
their villainous behaviour to the captain, and how they had run away with
the ship, and were preparing to commit further robberies, but that
Providence had ensnared them in their own ways, and that they were fallen
into the pit which they had dug for others.  I let them know that by my
direction the ship had been seized; that she lay now in the road; and
they might see by-and-by that their new captain had received the reward
of his villainy, and that they would see him hanging at the yard-arm;
that, as to them, I wanted to know what they had to say why I should not
execute them as pirates taken in the fact, as by my commission they could
not doubt but I had authority so to do.

One of them answered in the name of the rest, that they had nothing to
say but this, that when they were taken the captain promised them their
lives, and they humbly implored my mercy.  But I told them I knew not
what mercy to show them; for as for myself, I had resolved to quit the
island with all my men, and had taken passage with the captain to go to
England; and as for the captain, he could not carry them to England other
than as prisoners in irons, to be tried for mutiny and running away with
the ship; the consequence of which, they must needs know, would be the
gallows; so that I could not tell what was best for them, unless they had
a mind to take their fate in the island.  If they desired that, as I had
liberty to leave the island, I had some inclination to give them their
lives, if they thought they could shift on shore.  They seemed very
thankful for it, and said they would much rather venture to stay there
than be carried to England to be hanged.  So I left it on that issue.

However, the captain seemed to make some difficulty of it, as if he durst
not leave them there.  Upon this I seemed a little angry with the
captain, and told him that they were my prisoners, not his; and that
seeing I had offered them so much favour, I would be as good as my word;
and that if he did not think fit to consent to it I would set them at
liberty, as I found them: and if he did not like it he might take them
again if he could catch them.  Upon this they appeared very thankful, and
I accordingly set them at liberty, and bade them retire into the woods,
to the place whence they came, and I would leave them some firearms, some
ammunition, and some directions how they should live very well if they
thought fit.  Upon this I prepared to go on board the ship; but told the
captain I would stay that night to prepare my things, and desired him to
go on board in the meantime, and keep all right in the ship, and send the
boat on shore next day for me; ordering him, at all events, to cause the
new captain, who was killed, to be hanged at the yard-arm, that these men
might see him.

When the captain was gone I sent for the men up to me to my apartment,
and entered seriously into discourse with them on their circumstances.  I
told them I thought they had made a right choice; that if the captain had
carried them away they would certainly be hanged.  I showed them the new
captain hanging at the yard-arm of the ship, and told them they had
nothing less to expect.

When they had all declared their willingness to stay, I then told them I
would let them into the story of my living there, and put them into the
way of making it easy to them.  Accordingly, I gave them the whole
history of the place, and of my coming to it; showed them my
fortifications, the way I made my bread, planted my corn, cured my
grapes; and, in a word, all that was necessary to make them easy.  I told
them the story also of the seventeen Spaniards that were to be expected,
for whom I left a letter, and made them promise to treat them in common
with themselves.  Here it may be noted that the captain, who had ink on
board, was greatly surprised that I never hit upon a way of making ink of
charcoal and water, or of something else, as I had done things much more
difficult.

I left them my firearms—viz. five muskets, three fowling-pieces, and
three swords.  I had above a barrel and a half of powder left; for after
the first year or two I used but little, and wasted none.  I gave them a
description of the way I managed the goats, and directions to milk and
fatten them, and to make both butter and cheese.  In a word, I gave them
every part of my own story; and told them I should prevail with the
captain to leave them two barrels of gunpowder more, and some
garden-seeds, which I told them I would have been very glad of.  Also, I
gave them the bag of peas which the captain had brought me to eat, and
bade them be sure to sow and increase them.




CHAPTER XIX—RETURN TO ENGLAND


Having done all this I left them the next day, and went on board the
ship.  We prepared immediately to sail, but did not weigh that night.
The next morning early, two of the five men came swimming to the ship’s
side, and making the most lamentable complaint of the other three, begged
to be taken into the ship for God’s sake, for they should be murdered,
and begged the captain to take them on board, though he hanged them
immediately.  Upon this the captain pretended to have no power without
me; but after some difficulty, and after their solemn promises of
amendment, they were taken on board, and were, some time after, soundly
whipped and pickled; after which they proved very honest and quiet
fellows.

Some time after this, the boat was ordered on shore, the tide being up,
with the things promised to the men; to which the captain, at my
intercession, caused their chests and clothes to be added, which they
took, and were very thankful for.  I also encouraged them, by telling
them that if it lay in my power to send any vessel to take them in, I
would not forget them.

When I took leave of this island, I carried on board, for relics, the
great goat-skin cap I had made, my umbrella, and one of my parrots; also,
I forgot not to take the money I formerly mentioned, which had lain by me
so long useless that it was grown rusty or tarnished, and could hardly
pass for silver till it had been a little rubbed and handled, as also the
money I found in the wreck of the Spanish ship.  And thus I left the
island, the 19th of December, as I found by the ship’s account, in the
year 1686, after I had been upon it eight-and-twenty years, two months,
and nineteen days; being delivered from this second captivity the same
day of the month that I first made my escape in the long-boat from among
the Moors of Sallee.  In this vessel, after a long voyage, I arrived in
England the 11th of June, in the year 1687, having been thirty-five years
absent.

When I came to England I was as perfect a stranger to all the world as if
I had never been known there.  My benefactor and faithful steward, whom I
had left my money in trust with, was alive, but had had great misfortunes
in the world; was become a widow the second time, and very low in the
world.  I made her very easy as to what she owed me, assuring her I would
give her no trouble; but, on the contrary, in gratitude for her former
care and faithfulness to me, I relieved her as my little stock would
afford; which at that time would, indeed, allow me to do but little for
her; but I assured her I would never forget her former kindness to me;
nor did I forget her when I had sufficient to help her, as shall be
observed in its proper place.  I went down afterwards into Yorkshire; but
my father was dead, and my mother and all the family extinct, except that
I found two sisters, and two of the children of one of my brothers; and
as I had been long ago given over for dead, there had been no provision
made for me; so that, in a word, I found nothing to relieve or assist me;
and that the little money I had would not do much for me as to settling
in the world.

I met with one piece of gratitude indeed, which I did not expect; and
this was, that the master of the ship, whom I had so happily delivered,
and by the same means saved the ship and cargo, having given a very
handsome account to the owners of the manner how I had saved the lives of
the men and the ship, they invited me to meet them and some other
merchants concerned, and all together made me a very handsome compliment
upon the subject, and a present of almost £200 sterling.

But after making several reflections upon the circumstances of my life,
and how little way this would go towards settling me in the world, I
resolved to go to Lisbon, and see if I might not come at some information
of the state of my plantation in the Brazils, and of what was become of
my partner, who, I had reason to suppose, had some years past given me
over for dead.  With this view I took shipping for Lisbon, where I
arrived in April following, my man Friday accompanying me very honestly
in all these ramblings, and proving a most faithful servant upon all
occasions.  When I came to Lisbon, I found out, by inquiry, and to my
particular satisfaction, my old friend, the captain of the ship who first
took me up at sea off the shore of Africa.  He was now grown old, and had
left off going to sea, having put his son, who was far from a young man,
into his ship, and who still used the Brazil trade.  The old man did not
know me, and indeed I hardly knew him.  But I soon brought him to my
remembrance, and as soon brought myself to his remembrance, when I told
him who I was.

After some passionate expressions of the old acquaintance between us, I
inquired, you may be sure, after my plantation and my partner.  The old
man told me he had not been in the Brazils for about nine years; but that
he could assure me that when he came away my partner was living, but the
trustees whom I had joined with him to take cognisance of my part were
both dead: that, however, he believed I would have a very good account of
the improvement of the plantation; for that, upon the general belief of
my being cast away and drowned, my trustees had given in the account of
the produce of my part of the plantation to the procurator-fiscal, who
had appropriated it, in case I never came to claim it, one-third to the
king, and two-thirds to the monastery of St. Augustine, to be expended
for the benefit of the poor, and for the conversion of the Indians to the
Catholic faith: but that, if I appeared, or any one for me, to claim the
inheritance, it would be restored; only that the improvement, or annual
production, being distributed to charitable uses, could not be restored:
but he assured me that the steward of the king’s revenue from lands, and
the providore, or steward of the monastery, had taken great care all
along that the incumbent, that is to say my partner, gave every year a
faithful account of the produce, of which they had duly received my
moiety.  I asked him if he knew to what height of improvement he had
brought the plantation, and whether he thought it might be worth looking
after; or whether, on my going thither, I should meet with any
obstruction to my possessing my just right in the moiety.  He told me he
could not tell exactly to what degree the plantation was improved; but
this he knew, that my partner was grown exceeding rich upon the enjoying
his part of it; and that, to the best of his remembrance, he had heard
that the king’s third of my part, which was, it seems, granted away to
some other monastery or religious house, amounted to above two hundred
moidores a year: that as to my being restored to a quiet possession of
it, there was no question to be made of that, my partner being alive to
witness my title, and my name being also enrolled in the register of the
country; also he told me that the survivors of my two trustees were very
fair, honest people, and very wealthy; and he believed I would not only
have their assistance for putting me in possession, but would find a very
considerable sum of money in their hands for my account, being the
produce of the farm while their fathers held the trust, and before it was
given up, as above; which, as he remembered, was for about twelve years.

I showed myself a little concerned and uneasy at this account, and
inquired of the old captain how it came to pass that the trustees should
thus dispose of my effects, when he knew that I had made my will, and had
made him, the Portuguese captain, my universal heir, &c.

He told me that was true; but that as there was no proof of my being
dead, he could not act as executor until some certain account should come
of my death; and, besides, he was not willing to intermeddle with a thing
so remote: that it was true he had registered my will, and put in his
claim; and could he have given any account of my being dead or alive, he
would have acted by procuration, and taken possession of the ingenio (so
they call the sugar-house), and have given his son, who was now at the
Brazils, orders to do it.  “But,” says the old man, “I have one piece of
news to tell you, which perhaps may not be so acceptable to you as the
rest; and that is, believing you were lost, and all the world believing
so also, your partner and trustees did offer to account with me, in your
name, for the first six or eight years’ profits, which I received.  There
being at that time great disbursements for increasing the works, building
an ingenio, and buying slaves, it did not amount to near so much as
afterwards it produced; however,” says the old man, “I shall give you a
true account of what I have received in all, and how I have disposed of
it.”

After a few days’ further conference with this ancient friend, he brought
me an account of the first six years’ income of my plantation, signed by
my partner and the merchant-trustees, being always delivered in goods,
viz. tobacco in roll, and sugar in chests, besides rum, molasses, &c.,
which is the consequence of a sugar-work; and I found by this account,
that every year the income considerably increased; but, as above, the
disbursements being large, the sum at first was small: however, the old
man let me see that he was debtor to me four hundred and seventy moidores
of gold, besides sixty chests of sugar and fifteen double rolls of
tobacco, which were lost in his ship; he having been shipwrecked coming
home to Lisbon, about eleven years after my having the place.  The good
man then began to complain of his misfortunes, and how he had been
obliged to make use of my money to recover his losses, and buy him a
share in a new ship.  “However, my old friend,” says he, “you shall not
want a supply in your necessity; and as soon as my son returns you shall
be fully satisfied.”  Upon this he pulls out an old pouch, and gives me
one hundred and sixty Portugal moidores in gold; and giving the writings
of his title to the ship, which his son was gone to the Brazils in, of
which he was quarter-part owner, and his son another, he puts them both
into my hands for security of the rest.

I was too much moved with the honesty and kindness of the poor man to be
able to bear this; and remembering what he had done for me, how he had
taken me up at sea, and how generously he had used me on all occasions,
and particularly how sincere a friend he was now to me, I could hardly
refrain weeping at what he had said to me; therefore I asked him if his
circumstances admitted him to spare so much money at that time, and if it
would not straiten him?  He told me he could not say but it might
straiten him a little; but, however, it was my money, and I might want it
more than he.

Everything the good man said was full of affection, and I could hardly
refrain from tears while he spoke; in short, I took one hundred of the
moidores, and called for a pen and ink to give him a receipt for them:
then I returned him the rest, and told him if ever I had possession of
the plantation I would return the other to him also (as, indeed, I
afterwards did); and that as to the bill of sale of his part in his son’s
ship, I would not take it by any means; but that if I wanted the money, I
found he was honest enough to pay me; and if I did not, but came to
receive what he gave me reason to expect, I would never have a penny more
from him.

When this was past, the old man asked me if he should put me into a
method to make my claim to my plantation.  I told him I thought to go
over to it myself.  He said I might do so if I pleased, but that if I did
not, there were ways enough to secure my right, and immediately to
appropriate the profits to my use: and as there were ships in the river
of Lisbon just ready to go away to Brazil, he made me enter my name in a
public register, with his affidavit, affirming, upon oath, that I was
alive, and that I was the same person who took up the land for the
planting the said plantation at first.  This being regularly attested by
a notary, and a procuration affixed, he directed me to send it, with a
letter of his writing, to a merchant of his acquaintance at the place;
and then proposed my staying with him till an account came of the return.

Never was anything more honourable than the proceedings upon this
procuration; for in less than seven months I received a large packet from
the survivors of my trustees, the merchants, for whose account I went to
sea, in which were the following, particular letters and papers
enclosed:—

First, there was the account-current of the produce of my farm or
plantation, from the year when their fathers had balanced with my old
Portugal captain, being for six years; the balance appeared to be one
thousand one hundred and seventy-four moidores in my favour.

Secondly, there was the account of four years more, while they kept the
effects in their hands, before the government claimed the administration,
as being the effects of a person not to be found, which they called civil
death; and the balance of this, the value of the plantation increasing,
amounted to nineteen thousand four hundred and forty-six crusadoes, being
about three thousand two hundred and forty moidores.

Thirdly, there was the Prior of St. Augustine’s account, who had received
the profits for above fourteen years; but not being able to account for
what was disposed of by the hospital, very honestly declared he had eight
hundred and seventy-two moidores not distributed, which he acknowledged
to my account: as to the king’s part, that refunded nothing.

There was a letter of my partner’s, congratulating me very affectionately
upon my being alive, giving me an account how the estate was improved,
and what it produced a year; with the particulars of the number of
squares, or acres that it contained, how planted, how many slaves there
were upon it: and making two-and-twenty crosses for blessings, told me he
had said so many _Ave Marias_ to thank the Blessed Virgin that I was
alive; inviting me very passionately to come over and take possession of
my own, and in the meantime to give him orders to whom he should deliver
my effects if I did not come myself; concluding with a hearty tender of
his friendship, and that of his family; and sent me as a present seven
fine leopards’ skins, which he had, it seems, received from Africa, by
some other ship that he had sent thither, and which, it seems, had made a
better voyage than I.  He sent me also five chests of excellent
sweetmeats, and a hundred pieces of gold uncoined, not quite so large as
moidores.  By the same fleet my two merchant-trustees shipped me one
thousand two hundred chests of sugar, eight hundred rolls of tobacco, and
the rest of the whole account in gold.

I might well say now, indeed, that the latter end of Job was better than
the beginning.  It is impossible to express the flutterings of my very
heart when I found all my wealth about me; for as the Brazil ships come
all in fleets, the same ships which brought my letters brought my goods:
and the effects were safe in the river before the letters came to my
hand.  In a word, I turned pale, and grew sick; and, had not the old man
run and fetched me a cordial, I believe the sudden surprise of joy had
overset nature, and I had died upon the spot: nay, after that I continued
very ill, and was so some hours, till a physician being sent for, and
something of the real cause of my illness being known, he ordered me to
be let blood; after which I had relief, and grew well: but I verily
believe, if I had not been eased by a vent given in that manner to the
spirits, I should have died.

I was now master, all on a sudden, of above five thousand pounds sterling
in money, and had an estate, as I might well call it, in the Brazils, of
above a thousand pounds a year, as sure as an estate of lands in England:
and, in a word, I was in a condition which I scarce knew how to
understand, or how to compose myself for the enjoyment of it.  The first
thing I did was to recompense my original benefactor, my good old
captain, who had been first charitable to me in my distress, kind to me
in my beginning, and honest to me at the end.  I showed him all that was
sent to me; I told him that, next to the providence of Heaven, which
disposed all things, it was owing to him; and that it now lay on me to
reward him, which I would do a hundred-fold: so I first returned to him
the hundred moidores I had received of him; then I sent for a notary, and
caused him to draw up a general release or discharge from the four
hundred and seventy moidores, which he had acknowledged he owed me, in
the fullest and firmest manner possible.  After which I caused a
procuration to be drawn, empowering him to be the receiver of the annual
profits of my plantation: and appointing my partner to account with him,
and make the returns, by the usual fleets, to him in my name; and by a
clause in the end, made a grant of one hundred moidores a year to him
during his life, out of the effects, and fifty moidores a year to his son
after him, for his life: and thus I requited my old man.

I had now to consider which way to steer my course next, and what to do
with the estate that Providence had thus put into my hands; and, indeed,
I had more care upon my head now than I had in my state of life in the
island where I wanted nothing but what I had, and had nothing but what I
wanted; whereas I had now a great charge upon me, and my business was how
to secure it.  I had not a cave now to hide my money in, or a place where
it might lie without lock or key, till it grew mouldy and tarnished
before anybody would meddle with it; on the contrary, I knew not where to
put it, or whom to trust with it.  My old patron, the captain, indeed,
was honest, and that was the only refuge I had.  In the next place, my
interest in the Brazils seemed to summon me thither; but now I could not
tell how to think of going thither till I had settled my affairs, and
left my effects in some safe hands behind me.  At first I thought of my
old friend the widow, who I knew was honest, and would be just to me; but
then she was in years, and but poor, and, for aught I knew, might be in
debt: so that, in a word, I had no way but to go back to England myself
and take my effects with me.

It was some months, however, before I resolved upon this; and, therefore,
as I had rewarded the old captain fully, and to his satisfaction, who had
been my former benefactor, so I began to think of the poor widow, whose
husband had been my first benefactor, and she, while it was in her power,
my faithful steward and instructor.  So, the first thing I did, I got a
merchant in Lisbon to write to his correspondent in London, not only to
pay a bill, but to go find her out, and carry her, in money, a hundred
pounds from me, and to talk with her, and comfort her in her poverty, by
telling her she should, if I lived, have a further supply: at the same
time I sent my two sisters in the country a hundred pounds each, they
being, though not in want, yet not in very good circumstances; one having
been married and left a widow; and the other having a husband not so kind
to her as he should be.  But among all my relations or acquaintances I
could not yet pitch upon one to whom I durst commit the gross of my
stock, that I might go away to the Brazils, and leave things safe behind
me; and this greatly perplexed me.

I had once a mind to have gone to the Brazils and have settled myself
there, for I was, as it were, naturalised to the place; but I had some
little scruple in my mind about religion, which insensibly drew me back.
However, it was not religion that kept me from going there for the
present; and as I had made no scruple of being openly of the religion of
the country all the while I was among them, so neither did I yet; only
that, now and then, having of late thought more of it than formerly, when
I began to think of living and dying among them, I began to regret having
professed myself a Papist, and thought it might not be the best religion
to die with.

But, as I have said, this was not the main thing that kept me from going
to the Brazils, but that really I did not know with whom to leave my
effects behind me; so I resolved at last to go to England, where, if I
arrived, I concluded that I should make some acquaintance, or find some
relations, that would be faithful to me; and, accordingly, I prepared to
go to England with all my wealth.

In order to prepare things for my going home, I first (the Brazil fleet
being just going away) resolved to give answers suitable to the just and
faithful account of things I had from thence; and, first, to the Prior of
St. Augustine I wrote a letter full of thanks for his just dealings, and
the offer of the eight hundred and seventy-two moidores which were
undisposed of, which I desired might be given, five hundred to the
monastery, and three hundred and seventy-two to the poor, as the prior
should direct; desiring the good padre’s prayers for me, and the like.  I
wrote next a letter of thanks to my two trustees, with all the
acknowledgment that so much justice and honesty called for: as for
sending them any present, they were far above having any occasion of it.
Lastly, I wrote to my partner, acknowledging his industry in the
improving the plantation, and his integrity in increasing the stock of
the works; giving him instructions for his future government of my part,
according to the powers I had left with my old patron, to whom I desired
him to send whatever became due to me, till he should hear from me more
particularly; assuring him that it was my intention not only to come to
him, but to settle myself there for the remainder of my life.  To this I
added a very handsome present of some Italian silks for his wife and two
daughters, for such the captain’s son informed me he had; with two pieces
of fine English broadcloth, the best I could get in Lisbon, five pieces
of black baize, and some Flanders lace of a good value.

Having thus settled my affairs, sold my cargo, and turned all my effects
into good bills of exchange, my next difficulty was which way to go to
England: I had been accustomed enough to the sea, and yet I had a strange
aversion to go to England by the sea at that time, and yet I could give
no reason for it, yet the difficulty increased upon me so much, that
though I had once shipped my baggage in order to go, yet I altered my
mind, and that not once but two or three times.

It is true I had been very unfortunate by sea, and this might be one of
the reasons; but let no man slight the strong impulses of his own
thoughts in cases of such moment: two of the ships which I had singled
out to go in, I mean more particularly singled out than any other, having
put my things on board one of them, and in the other having agreed with
the captain; I say two of these ships miscarried.  One was taken by the
Algerines, and the other was lost on the Start, near Torbay, and all the
people drowned except three; so that in either of those vessels I had
been made miserable.

Having been thus harassed in my thoughts, my old pilot, to whom I
communicated everything, pressed me earnestly not to go by sea, but
either to go by land to the Groyne, and cross over the Bay of Biscay to
Rochelle, from whence it was but an easy and safe journey by land to
Paris, and so to Calais and Dover; or to go up to Madrid, and so all the
way by land through France.  In a word, I was so prepossessed against my
going by sea at all, except from Calais to Dover, that I resolved to
travel all the way by land; which, as I was not in haste, and did not
value the charge, was by much the pleasanter way: and to make it more so,
my old captain brought an English gentleman, the son of a merchant in
Lisbon, who was willing to travel with me; after which we picked up two
more English merchants also, and two young Portuguese gentlemen, the last
going to Paris only; so that in all there were six of us and five
servants; the two merchants and the two Portuguese, contenting themselves
with one servant between two, to save the charge; and as for me, I got an
English sailor to travel with me as a servant, besides my man Friday, who
was too much a stranger to be capable of supplying the place of a servant
on the road.

In this manner I set out from Lisbon; and our company being very well
mounted and armed, we made a little troop, whereof they did me the honour
to call me captain, as well because I was the oldest man, as because I
had two servants, and, indeed, was the origin of the whole journey.

As I have troubled you with none of my sea journals, so I shall trouble
you now with none of my land journals; but some adventures that happened
to us in this tedious and difficult journey I must not omit.

When we came to Madrid, we, being all of us strangers to Spain, were
willing to stay some time to see the court of Spain, and what was worth
observing; but it being the latter part of the summer, we hastened away,
and set out from Madrid about the middle of October; but when we came to
the edge of Navarre, we were alarmed, at several towns on the way, with
an account that so much snow was falling on the French side of the
mountains, that several travellers were obliged to come back to
Pampeluna, after having attempted at an extreme hazard to pass on.

When we came to Pampeluna itself, we found it so indeed; and to me, that
had been always used to a hot climate, and to countries where I could
scarce bear any clothes on, the cold was insufferable; nor, indeed, was
it more painful than surprising to come but ten days before out of Old
Castile, where the weather was not only warm but very hot, and
immediately to feel a wind from the Pyrenean Mountains so very keen, so
severely cold, as to be intolerable and to endanger benumbing and
perishing of our fingers and toes.

Poor Friday was really frightened when he saw the mountains all covered
with snow, and felt cold weather, which he had never seen or felt before
in his life.  To mend the matter, when we came to Pampeluna it continued
snowing with so much violence and so long, that the people said winter
was come before its time; and the roads, which were difficult before,
were now quite impassable; for, in a word, the snow lay in some places
too thick for us to travel, and being not hard frozen, as is the case in
the northern countries, there was no going without being in danger of
being buried alive every step.  We stayed no less than twenty days at
Pampeluna; when (seeing the winter coming on, and no likelihood of its
being better, for it was the severest winter all over Europe that had
been known in the memory of man) I proposed that we should go away to
Fontarabia, and there take shipping for Bordeaux, which was a very little
voyage.  But, while I was considering this, there came in four French
gentlemen, who, having been stopped on the French side of the passes, as
we were on the Spanish, had found out a guide, who, traversing the
country near the head of Languedoc, had brought them over the mountains
by such ways that they were not much incommoded with the snow; for where
they met with snow in any quantity, they said it was frozen hard enough
to bear them and their horses.  We sent for this guide, who told us he
would undertake to carry us the same way, with no hazard from the snow,
provided we were armed sufficiently to protect ourselves from wild
beasts; for, he said, in these great snows it was frequent for some
wolves to show themselves at the foot of the mountains, being made
ravenous for want of food, the ground being covered with snow.  We told
him we were well enough prepared for such creatures as they were, if he
would insure us from a kind of two-legged wolves, which we were told we
were in most danger from, especially on the French side of the mountains.
He satisfied us that there was no danger of that kind in the way that we
were to go; so we readily agreed to follow him, as did also twelve other
gentlemen with their servants, some French, some Spanish, who, as I said,
had attempted to go, and were obliged to come back again.

Accordingly, we set out from Pampeluna with our guide on the 15th of
November; and indeed I was surprised when, instead of going forward, he
came directly back with us on the same road that we came from Madrid,
about twenty miles; when, having passed two rivers, and come into the
plain country, we found ourselves in a warm climate again, where the
country was pleasant, and no snow to be seen; but, on a sudden, turning
to his left, he approached the mountains another way; and though it is
true the hills and precipices looked dreadful, yet he made so many tours,
such meanders, and led us by such winding ways, that we insensibly passed
the height of the mountains without being much encumbered with the snow;
and all on a sudden he showed us the pleasant and fruitful provinces of
Languedoc and Gascony, all green and flourishing, though at a great
distance, and we had some rough way to pass still.

We were a little uneasy, however, when we found it snowed one whole day
and a night so fast that we could not travel; but he bid us be easy; we
should soon be past it all: we found, indeed, that we began to descend
every day, and to come more north than before; and so, depending upon our
guide, we went on.

It was about two hours before night when, our guide being something
before us, and not just in sight, out rushed three monstrous wolves, and
after them a bear, from a hollow way adjoining to a thick wood; two of
the wolves made at the guide, and had he been far before us, he would
have been devoured before we could have helped him; one of them fastened
upon his horse, and the other attacked the man with such violence, that
he had not time, or presence of mind enough, to draw his pistol, but
hallooed and cried out to us most lustily.  My man Friday being next me,
I bade him ride up and see what was the matter.  As soon as Friday came
in sight of the man, he hallooed out as loud as the other, “O master! O
master!” but like a bold fellow, rode directly up to the poor man, and
with his pistol shot the wolf in the head that attacked him.

It was happy for the poor man that it was my man Friday; for, having been
used to such creatures in his country, he had no fear upon him, but went
close up to him and shot him; whereas, any other of us would have fired
at a farther distance, and have perhaps either missed the wolf or
endangered shooting the man.

But it was enough to have terrified a bolder man than I; and, indeed, it
alarmed all our company, when, with the noise of Friday’s pistol, we
heard on both sides the most dismal howling of wolves; and the noise,
redoubled by the echo of the mountains, appeared to us as if there had
been a prodigious number of them; and perhaps there was not such a few as
that we had no cause of apprehension: however, as Friday had killed this
wolf, the other that had fastened upon the horse left him immediately,
and fled, without doing him any damage, having happily fastened upon his
head, where the bosses of the bridle had stuck in his teeth.  But the man
was most hurt; for the raging creature had bit him twice, once in the
arm, and the other time a little above his knee; and though he had made
some defence, he was just tumbling down by the disorder of his horse,
when Friday came up and shot the wolf.

It is easy to suppose that at the noise of Friday’s pistol we all mended
our pace, and rode up as fast as the way, which was very difficult, would
give us leave, to see what was the matter.  As soon as we came clear of
the trees, which blinded us before, we saw clearly what had been the
case, and how Friday had disengaged the poor guide, though we did not
presently discern what kind of creature it was he had killed.




CHAPTER XX—FIGHT BETWEEN FRIDAY AND A BEAR


But never was a fight managed so hardily, and in such a surprising manner
as that which followed between Friday and the bear, which gave us all,
though at first we were surprised and afraid for him, the greatest
diversion imaginable.  As the bear is a heavy, clumsy creature, and does
not gallop as the wolf does, who is swift and light, so he has two
particular qualities, which generally are the rule of his actions; first,
as to men, who are not his proper prey (he does not usually attempt them,
except they first attack him, unless he be excessively hungry, which it
is probable might now be the case, the ground being covered with snow),
if you do not meddle with him, he will not meddle with you; but then you
must take care to be very civil to him, and give him the road, for he is
a very nice gentleman; he will not go a step out of his way for a prince;
nay, if you are really afraid, your best way is to look another way and
keep going on; for sometimes if you stop, and stand still, and look
steadfastly at him, he takes it for an affront; but if you throw or toss
anything at him, though it were but a bit of stick as big as your finger,
he thinks himself abused, and sets all other business aside to pursue his
revenge, and will have satisfaction in point of honour—that is his first
quality: the next is, if he be once affronted, he will never leave you,
night or day, till he has his revenge, but follows at a good round rate
till he overtakes you.

My man Friday had delivered our guide, and when we came up to him he was
helping him off his horse, for the man was both hurt and frightened, when
on a sudden we espied the bear come out of the wood; and a monstrous one
it was, the biggest by far that ever I saw.  We were all a little
surprised when we saw him; but when Friday saw him, it was easy to see
joy and courage in the fellow’s countenance.  “O! O! O!” says Friday,
three times, pointing to him; “O master, you give me te leave, me shakee
te hand with him; me makee you good laugh.”

I was surprised to see the fellow so well pleased.  “You fool,” says I,
“he will eat you up.”—“Eatee me up! eatee me up!” says Friday, twice over
again; “me eatee him up; me makee you good laugh; you all stay here, me
show you good laugh.”  So down he sits, and gets off his boots in a
moment, and puts on a pair of pumps (as we call the flat shoes they wear,
and which he had in his pocket), gives my other servant his horse, and
with his gun away he flew, swift like the wind.

The bear was walking softly on, and offered to meddle with nobody, till
Friday coming pretty near, calls to him, as if the bear could understand
him.  “Hark ye, hark ye,” says Friday, “me speakee with you.”  We
followed at a distance, for now being down on the Gascony side of the
mountains, we were entered a vast forest, where the country was plain and
pretty open, though it had many trees in it scattered here and there.
Friday, who had, as we say, the heels of the bear, came up with him
quickly, and took up a great stone, and threw it at him, and hit him just
on the head, but did him no more harm than if he had thrown it against a
wall; but it answered Friday’s end, for the rogue was so void of fear
that he did it purely to make the bear follow him, and show us some laugh
as he called it.  As soon as the bear felt the blow, and saw him, he
turns about and comes after him, taking very long strides, and shuffling
on at a strange rate, so as would have put a horse to a middling gallop;
away reins Friday, and takes his course as if he ran towards us for help;
so we all resolved to fire at once upon the bear, and deliver my man;
though I was angry at him for bringing the bear back upon us, when he was
going about his own business another way; and especially I was angry that
he had turned the bear upon us, and then ran away; and I called out, “You
dog! is this your making us laugh?  Come away, and take your horse, that
we may shoot the creature.”  He heard me, and cried out, “No shoot, no
shoot; stand still, and you get much laugh:” and as the nimble creature
ran two feet for the bear’s one, he turned on a sudden on one side of us,
and seeing a great oak-tree fit for his purpose, he beckoned to us to
follow; and doubling his pace, he got nimbly up the tree, laying his gun
down upon the ground, at about five or six yards from the bottom of the
tree.  The bear soon came to the tree, and we followed at a distance: the
first thing he did he stopped at the gun, smelt at it, but let it lie,
and up he scrambles into the tree, climbing like a cat, though so
monstrous heavy.  I was amazed at the folly, as I thought it, of my man,
and could not for my life see anything to laugh at, till seeing the bear
get up the tree, we all rode near to him.

When we came to the tree, there was Friday got out to the small end of a
large branch, and the bear got about half-way to him.  As soon as the
bear got out to that part where the limb of the tree was weaker, “Ha!”
says he to us, “now you see me teachee the bear dance:” so he began
jumping and shaking the bough, at which the bear began to totter, but
stood still, and began to look behind him, to see how he should get back;
then, indeed, we did laugh heartily.  But Friday had not done with him by
a great deal; when seeing him stand still, he called out to him again, as
if he had supposed the bear could speak English, “What, you come no
farther? pray you come farther;” so he left jumping and shaking the tree;
and the bear, just as if he understood what he said, did come a little
farther; then he began jumping again, and the bear stopped again.  We
thought now was a good time to knock him in the head, and called to
Friday to stand still and we should shoot the bear: but he cried out
earnestly, “Oh, pray!  Oh, pray! no shoot, me shoot by and then:” he
would have said by-and-by.  However, to shorten the story, Friday danced
so much, and the bear stood so ticklish, that we had laughing enough, but
still could not imagine what the fellow would do: for first we thought he
depended upon shaking the bear off; and we found the bear was too cunning
for that too; for he would not go out far enough to be thrown down, but
clung fast with his great broad claws and feet, so that we could not
imagine what would be the end of it, and what the jest would be at last.
But Friday put us out of doubt quickly: for seeing the bear cling fast to
the bough, and that he would not be persuaded to come any farther, “Well,
well,” says Friday, “you no come farther, me go; you no come to me, me
come to you;” and upon this he went out to the smaller end, where it
would bend with his weight, and gently let himself down by it, sliding
down the bough till he came near enough to jump down on his feet, and
away he ran to his gun, took it up, and stood still.  “Well,” said I to
him, “Friday, what will you do now?  Why don’t you shoot him?”  “No
shoot,” says Friday, “no yet; me shoot now, me no kill; me stay, give you
one more laugh:” and, indeed, so he did; for when the bear saw his enemy
gone, he came back from the bough, where he stood, but did it very
cautiously, looking behind him every step, and coming backward till he
got into the body of the tree, then, with the same hinder end foremost,
he came down the tree, grasping it with his claws, and moving one foot at
a time, very leisurely.  At this juncture, and just before he could set
his hind foot on the ground, Friday stepped up close to him, clapped the
muzzle of his piece into his ear, and shot him dead.  Then the rogue
turned about to see if we did not laugh; and when he saw we were pleased
by our looks, he began to laugh very loud.  “So we kill bear in my
country,” says Friday.  “So you kill them?” says I; “why, you have no
guns.”—“No,” says he, “no gun, but shoot great much long arrow.”  This
was a good diversion to us; but we were still in a wild place, and our
guide very much hurt, and what to do we hardly knew; the howling of
wolves ran much in my head; and, indeed, except the noise I once heard on
the shore of Africa, of which I have said something already, I never
heard anything that filled me with so much horror.

These things, and the approach of night, called us off, or else, as
Friday would have had us, we should certainly have taken the skin of this
monstrous creature off, which was worth saving; but we had near three
leagues to go, and our guide hastened us; so we left him, and went
forward on our journey.

The ground was still covered with snow, though not so deep and dangerous
as on the mountains; and the ravenous creatures, as we heard afterwards,
were come down into the forest and plain country, pressed by hunger, to
seek for food, and had done a great deal of mischief in the villages,
where they surprised the country people, killed a great many of their
sheep and horses, and some people too.

We had one dangerous place to pass, and our guide told us if there were
more wolves in the country we should find them there; and this was a
small plain, surrounded with woods on every side, and a long, narrow
defile, or lane, which we were to pass to get through the wood, and then
we should come to the village where we were to lodge.

It was within half-an-hour of sunset when we entered the wood, and a
little after sunset when we came into the plain: we met with nothing in
the first wood, except that in a little plain within the wood, which was
not above two furlongs over, we saw five great wolves cross the road,
full speed, one after another, as if they had been in chase of some
prey, and had it in view; they took no notice of us, and were gone out
of sight in a few moments.  Upon this, our guide, who, by the way, was
but a fainthearted fellow, bid us keep in a ready posture, for he
believed there were more wolves a-coming.  We kept our arms ready, and
our eyes about us; but we saw no more wolves till we came through that
wood, which was near half a league, and entered the plain.  As soon as
we came into the plain, we had occasion enough to look about us.  The
first object we met with was a dead horse; that is to say, a poor horse
which the wolves had killed, and at least a dozen of them at work, we
could not say eating him, but picking his bones rather; for they had
eaten up all the flesh before. We did not think fit to disturb them at
their feast, neither did they take much notice of us.  Friday would have
let fly at them, but I would not suffer him by any means; for I found we
were like to have more business upon our hands than we were aware of.
We had not gone half over the plain when we began to hear the wolves
howl in the wood on our left in a frightful manner, and presently after
we saw about a hundred coming on directly towards us, all in a body, and
most of them in a line, as regularly as an army drawn up by experienced
officers.  I scarce knew in what manner to receive them, but found to
draw ourselves in a close line was the only way; so we formed in a
moment; but that we might not have too much interval, I ordered that
only every other man should fire, and that the others, who had not
fired, should stand ready to give them a second volley immediately, if
they continued to advance upon us; and then that those that had fired at
first should not pretend to load their fusees again, but stand ready,
every one with a pistol, for we were all armed with a fusee and a pair
of pistols each man; so we were, by this method, able to fire six
volleys, half of us at a time; however, at present we had no necessity;
for upon firing the first volley, the enemy made a full stop, being
terrified as well with the noise as with the fire.  Four of them being
shot in the head, dropped; several others were wounded, and went
bleeding off, as we could see by the snow.  I found they stopped, but
did not immediately retreat; whereupon, remembering that I had been told
that the fiercest creatures were terrified at the voice of a man, I
caused all the company to halloo as loud as they could; and I found the
notion not altogether mistaken; for upon our shout they began to retire
and turn about.  I then ordered a second volley to be fired in their
rear, which put them to the gallop, and away they went to the woods.
This gave us leisure to charge our pieces again; and that we might lose
no time, we kept going; but we had but little more than loaded our
fusees, and put ourselves in readiness, when we heard a terrible noise
in the same wood on our left, only that it was farther onward, the same
way we were to go.

The night was coming on, and the light began to be dusky, which made it
worse on our side; but the noise increasing, we could easily perceive
that it was the howling and yelling of those hellish creatures; and on a
sudden we perceived three troops of wolves, one on our left, one behind
us, and one in our front, so that we seemed to be surrounded with them:
however, as they did not fall upon us, we kept our way forward, as fast
as we could make our horses go, which, the way being very rough, was only
a good hard trot.  In this manner, we came in view of the entrance of a
wood, through which we were to pass, at the farther side of the plain;
but we were greatly surprised, when coming nearer the lane or pass, we
saw a confused number of wolves standing just at the entrance.  On a
sudden, at another opening of the wood, we heard the noise of a gun, and
looking that way, out rushed a horse, with a saddle and a bridle on him,
flying like the wind, and sixteen or seventeen wolves after him, full
speed: the horse had the advantage of them; but as we supposed that he
could not hold it at that rate, we doubted not but they would get up with
him at last: no question but they did.

But here we had a most horrible sight; for riding up to the entrance
where the horse came out, we found the carcasses of another horse and of
two men, devoured by the ravenous creatures; and one of the men was no
doubt the same whom we heard fire the gun, for there lay a gun just by
him fired off; but as to the man, his head and the upper part of his body
was eaten up.  This filled us with horror, and we knew not what course to
take; but the creatures resolved us soon, for they gathered about us
presently, in hopes of prey; and I verily believe there were three
hundred of them.  It happened, very much to our advantage, that at the
entrance into the wood, but a little way from it, there lay some large
timber-trees, which had been cut down the summer before, and I suppose
lay there for carriage.  I drew my little troop in among those trees, and
placing ourselves in a line behind one long tree, I advised them all to
alight, and keeping that tree before us for a breastwork, to stand in a
triangle, or three fronts, enclosing our horses in the centre.  We did
so, and it was well we did; for never was a more furious charge than the
creatures made upon us in this place.  They came on with a growling kind
of noise, and mounted the piece of timber, which, as I said, was our
breastwork, as if they were only rushing upon their prey; and this fury
of theirs, it seems, was principally occasioned by their seeing our
horses behind us.  I ordered our men to fire as before, every other man;
and they took their aim so sure that they killed several of the wolves at
the first volley; but there was a necessity to keep a continual firing,
for they came on like devils, those behind pushing on those before.

When we had fired a second volley of our fusees, we thought they stopped
a little, and I hoped they would have gone off, but it was but a moment,
for others came forward again; so we fired two volleys of our pistols;
and I believe in these four firings we had killed seventeen or eighteen
of them, and lamed twice as many, yet they came on again.  I was loth to
spend our shot too hastily; so I called my servant, not my man Friday,
for he was better employed, for, with the greatest dexterity imaginable,
he had charged my fusee and his own while we were engaged—but, as I said,
I called my other man, and giving him a horn of powder, I had him lay a
train all along the piece of timber, and let it be a large train.  He did
so, and had but just time to get away, when the wolves came up to it, and
some got upon it, when I, snapping an unchanged pistol close to the
powder, set it on fire; those that were upon the timber were scorched
with it, and six or seven of them fell; or rather jumped in among us with
the force and fright of the fire; we despatched these in an instant, and
the rest were so frightened with the light, which the night—for it was
now very near dark—made more terrible that they drew back a little; upon
which I ordered our last pistols to be fired off in one volley, and after
that we gave a shout; upon this the wolves turned tail, and we sallied
immediately upon near twenty lame ones that we found struggling on the
ground, and fell to cutting them with our swords, which answered our
expectation, for the crying and howling they made was better understood
by their fellows; so that they all fled and left us.

We had, first and last, killed about threescore of them, and had it been
daylight we had killed many more.  The field of battle being thus
cleared, we made forward again, for we had still near a league to go.  We
heard the ravenous creatures howl and yell in the woods as we went
several times, and sometimes we fancied we saw some of them; but the snow
dazzling our eyes, we were not certain.  In about an hour more we came to
the town where we were to lodge, which we found in a terrible fright and
all in arms; for, it seems, the night before the wolves and some bears
had broken into the village, and put them in such terror that they were
obliged to keep guard night and day, but especially in the night, to
preserve their cattle, and indeed their people.

The next morning our guide was so ill, and his limbs swelled so much with
the rankling of his two wounds, that he could go no farther; so we were
obliged to take a new guide here, and go to Toulouse, where we found a
warm climate, a fruitful, pleasant country, and no snow, no wolves, nor
anything like them; but when we told our story at Toulouse, they told us
it was nothing but what was ordinary in the great forest at the foot of
the mountains, especially when the snow lay on the ground; but they
inquired much what kind of guide we had got who would venture to bring us
that way in such a severe season, and told us it was surprising we were
not all devoured.  When we told them how we placed ourselves and the
horses in the middle, they blamed us exceedingly, and told us it was
fifty to one but we had been all destroyed, for it was the sight of the
horses which made the wolves so furious, seeing their prey, and that at
other times they are really afraid of a gun; but being excessively
hungry, and raging on that account, the eagerness to come at the horses
had made them senseless of danger, and that if we had not by the
continual fire, and at last by the stratagem of the train of powder,
mastered them, it had been great odds but that we had been torn to
pieces; whereas, had we been content to have sat still on horseback, and
fired as horsemen, they would not have taken the horses so much for their
own, when men were on their backs, as otherwise; and withal, they told us
that at last, if we had stood altogether, and left our horses, they would
have been so eager to have devoured them, that we might have come off
safe, especially having our firearms in our hands, being so many in
number.  For my part, I was never so sensible of danger in my life; for,
seeing above three hundred devils come roaring and open-mouthed to devour
us, and having nothing to shelter us or retreat to, I gave myself over
for lost; and, as it was, I believe I shall never care to cross those
mountains again: I think I would much rather go a thousand leagues by
sea, though I was sure to meet with a storm once a-week.

I have nothing uncommon to take notice of in my passage through
France—nothing but what other travellers have given an account of with
much more advantage than I can.  I travelled from Toulouse to Paris, and
without any considerable stay came to Calais, and landed safe at Dover
the 14th of January, after having had a severe cold season to travel in.

I was now come to the centre of my travels, and had in a little time all
my new-discovered estate safe about me, the bills of exchange which I
brought with me having been currently paid.

My principal guide and privy-counsellor was my good ancient widow, who,
in gratitude for the money I had sent her, thought no pains too much nor
care too great to employ for me; and I trusted her so entirely that I was
perfectly easy as to the security of my effects; and, indeed, I was very
happy from the beginning, and now to the end, in the unspotted integrity
of this good gentlewoman.

And now, having resolved to dispose of my plantation in the Brazils, I
wrote to my old friend at Lisbon, who, having offered it to the two
merchants, the survivors of my trustees, who lived in the Brazils, they
accepted the offer, and remitted thirty-three thousand pieces of eight to
a correspondent of theirs at Lisbon to pay for it.

In return, I signed the instrument of sale in the form which they sent
from Lisbon, and sent it to my old man, who sent me the bills of exchange
for thirty-two thousand eight hundred pieces of eight for the estate,
reserving the payment of one hundred moidores a year to him (the old man)
during his life, and fifty moidores afterwards to his son for his life,
which I had promised them, and which the plantation was to make good as a
rent-charge.  And thus I have given the first part of a life of fortune
and adventure—a life of Providence’s chequer-work, and of a variety which
the world will seldom be able to show the like of; beginning foolishly,
but closing much more happily than any part of it ever gave me leave so
much as to hope for.

Any one would think that in this state of complicated good fortune I was
past running any more hazards—and so, indeed, I had been, if other
circumstances had concurred; but I was inured to a wandering life, had no
family, nor many relations; nor, however rich, had I contracted fresh
acquaintance; and though I had sold my estate in the Brazils, yet I could
not keep that country out of my head, and had a great mind to be upon the
wing again; especially I could not resist the strong inclination I had to
see my island, and to know if the poor Spaniards were in being there.  My
true friend, the widow, earnestly dissuaded me from it, and so far
prevailed with me, that for almost seven years she prevented my running
abroad, during which time I took my two nephews, the children of one of
my brothers, into my care; the eldest, having something of his own, I
bred up as a gentleman, and gave him a settlement of some addition to his
estate after my decease.  The other I placed with the captain of a ship;
and after five years, finding him a sensible, bold, enterprising young
fellow, I put him into a good ship, and sent him to sea; and this young
fellow afterwards drew me in, as old as I was, to further adventures
myself.

In the meantime, I in part settled myself here; for, first of all, I
married, and that not either to my disadvantage or dissatisfaction, and
had three children, two sons and one daughter; but my wife dying, and my
nephew coming home with good success from a voyage to Spain, my
inclination to go abroad, and his importunity, prevailed, and engaged me
to go in his ship as a private trader to the East Indies; this was in the
year 1694.

In this voyage I visited my new colony in the island, saw my successors
the Spaniards, had the old story of their lives and of the villains I
left there; how at first they insulted the poor Spaniards, how they
afterwards agreed, disagreed, united, separated, and how at last the
Spaniards were obliged to use violence with them; how they were subjected
to the Spaniards, how honestly the Spaniards used them—a history, if it
were entered into, as full of variety and wonderful accidents as my own
part—particularly, also, as to their battles with the Caribbeans, who
landed several times upon the island, and as to the improvement they made
upon the island itself, and how five of them made an attempt upon the
mainland, and brought away eleven men and five women prisoners, by which,
at my coming, I found about twenty young children on the island.

Here I stayed about twenty days, left them supplies of all necessary
things, and particularly of arms, powder, shot, clothes, tools, and two
workmen, which I had brought from England with me, viz. a carpenter and a
smith.

Besides this, I shared the lands into parts with them, reserved to myself
the property of the whole, but gave them such parts respectively as they
agreed on; and having settled all things with them, and engaged them not
to leave the place, I left them there.

From thence I touched at the Brazils, from whence I sent a bark, which I
bought there, with more people to the island; and in it, besides other
supplies, I sent seven women, being such as I found proper for service,
or for wives to such as would take them.  As to the Englishmen, I
promised to send them some women from England, with a good cargo of
necessaries, if they would apply themselves to planting—which I
afterwards could not perform.  The fellows proved very honest and
diligent after they were mastered and had their properties set apart for
them.  I sent them, also, from the Brazils, five cows, three of them
being big with calf, some sheep, and some hogs, which when I came again
were considerably increased.

But all these things, with an account how three hundred Caribbees came
and invaded them, and ruined their plantations, and how they fought with
that whole number twice, and were at first defeated, and one of them
killed; but at last, a storm destroying their enemies’ canoes, they
famished or destroyed almost all the rest, and renewed and recovered the
possession of their plantation, and still lived upon the island.

All these things, with some very surprising incidents in some new
adventures of my own, for ten years more, I shall give a farther account
of in the Second Part of my Story.

ROXANA

[Illustration: _I was rich, beautiful, and agreeable, and not yet old_


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


    ROXANA                                      _Frontispiece_

    THE BREWER AND HIS MEN                           _Page_ 12

    THE JEWELLER IS ABOUT TO LEAVE FOR VERSAILLES           74

    THE VISIT OF THE PRINCE                                 90

    THE DUTCH MERCHANT CALLS ON ROXANA.                    286

    THE AMOUR DRAWS TO AN END                              302

    ROXANA'S DAUGHTER AND THE QUAKER                       479

    ROXANA IS CONFRONTED WITH HER DAUGHTER                 534



AUTHOR'S PREFACE


The history of this beautiful lady is to speak for itself; if it is not
as beautiful as the lady herself is reported to be; if it is not as
diverting as the reader can desire, and much more than he can reasonably
expect; and if all the most diverting parts of it are not adapted to the
instruction and improvement of the reader, the relator says it must be
from the defect of his performance; dressing up the story in worse
clothes than the lady whose words he speaks, prepared for the world.

He takes the liberty to say that this story differs from most of the
modern performances of this kind, though some of them have met with a
very good reception in the world. I say, it differs from them in this
great and essential article, namely, that the foundation of this is laid
in truth of fact; and so the work is not a story, but a history.

The scene is laid so near the place where the main part of it was
transacted that it was necessary to conceal names and persons, lest what
cannot be yet entirely forgot in that part of the town should be
remembered, and the facts traced back too plainly by the many people
yet living, who would know the persons by the particulars.

It is not always necessary that the names of persons should be
discovered, though the history may be many ways useful; and if we should
be always obliged to name the persons, or not to relate the story, the
consequence might be only this--that many a pleasant and delightful
history would be buried in the dark, and the world deprived both of the
pleasure and the profit of it.

The writer says he was particularly acquainted with this lady's first
husband, the brewer, and with his father, and also with his bad
circumstances, and knows that first part of the story to be truth.

This may, he hopes, be a pledge for the credit of the rest, though the
latter part of her history lay abroad, and could not be so well vouched
as the first; yet, as she has told it herself, we have the less reason
to question the truth of that part also.

In the manner she has told the story, it is evident she does not insist
upon her justification in any one part of it; much less does she
recommend her conduct, or, indeed, any part of it, except her
repentance, to our imitation. On the contrary, she makes frequent
excursions, in a just censuring and condemning her own practice. How
often does she reproach herself in the most passionate manner, and guide
us to just reflections in the like cases!

It is true she met with unexpected success in all her wicked courses;
but even in the highest elevations of her prosperity she makes frequent
acknowledgments that the pleasure of her wickedness was not worth the
repentance; and that all the satisfaction she had, all the joy in the
view of her prosperity--no, nor all the wealth she rolled in, the gaiety
of her appearance, the equipages and the honours she was attended with,
could quiet her mind, abate the reproaches of her conscience, or procure
her an hour's sleep when just reflection kept her waking.

The noble inferences that are drawn from this one part are worth all the
rest of the story, and abundantly justify, as they are the professed
design of, the publication.

If there are any parts in her story which, being obliged to relate a
wicked action, seem to describe it too plainly, the writer says all
imaginable care has been taken to keep clear of indecencies and immodest
expressions; and it is hoped you will find nothing to prompt a vicious
mind, but everywhere much to discourage and expose it.

Scenes of crime can scarce be represented in such a manner but some may
make a criminal use of them; but when vice is painted in its low-prized
colours, it is not to make people in love with it, but to expose it; and
if the reader makes a wrong use of the figures, the wickedness is his
own.

In the meantime, the advantages of the present work are so great, and
the virtuous reader has room for so much improvement, that we make no
question the story, however meanly told, will find a passage to his best
hours, and be read both with profit and delight.




A HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF ROXANA


I was born, as my friends told me, at the city of Poitiers, in the
province or county of Poitou, in France, from whence I was brought to
England by my parents, who fled for their religion about the year 1683,
when the Protestants were banished from France by the cruelty of their
persecutors.

I, who knew little or nothing of what I was brought over hither for, was
well enough pleased with being here. London, a large and gay city, took
with me mighty well, who, from my being a child, loved a crowd, and to
see a great many fine folks.

I retained nothing of France but the language, my father and mother
being people of better fashion than ordinarily the people called
refugees at that time were; and having fled early, while it was easy to
secure their effects, had, before their coming over, remitted
considerable sums of money, or, as I remember, a considerable value in
French brandy, paper, and other goods; and these selling very much to
advantage here, my father was in very good circumstances at his coming
over, so that he was far from applying to the rest of our nation that
were here for countenance and relief. On the contrary, he had his door
continually thronged with miserable objects of the poor starving
creatures who at that time fled hither for shelter on account of
conscience, or something else.

I have indeed heard my father say that he was pestered with a great many
of those who, for any religion they had, might e'en have stayed where
they were, but who flocked over hither in droves, for what they call in
English a livelihood; hearing with what open arms the refugees were
received in England, and how they fell readily into business, being, by
the charitable assistance of the people in London, encouraged to work in
their manufactories in Spitalfields, Canterbury, and other places, and
that they had a much better price for their work than in France, and the
like.

My father, I say, told me that he was more pestered with the clamours of
these people than of those who were truly refugees, and fled in distress
merely for conscience.

I was about ten years old when I was brought over hither, where, as I
have said, my father lived in very good circumstances, and died in about
eleven years more; in which time, as I had accomplished myself for the
sociable part of the world, so I had acquainted myself with some of our
English neighbours, as is the custom in London; and as, while I was
young, I had picked up three or four playfellows and companions suitable
to my years, so, as we grew bigger, we learned to call one another
intimates and friends; and this forwarded very much the finishing me for
conversation and the world.

I went to English schools, and being young, I learned the English tongue
perfectly well, with all the customs of the English young women; so that
I retained nothing of the French but the speech; nor did I so much as
keep any remains of the French language tagged to my way of speaking, as
most foreigners do, but spoke what we call natural English, as if I had
been born here.

Being to give my own character, I must be excused to give it as
impartially as possible, and as if I was speaking of another body; and
the sequel will lead you to judge whether I flatter myself or no.

I was (speaking of myself at about fourteen years of age) tall, and very
well made; sharp as a hawk in matters of common knowledge; quick and
smart in discourse; apt to be satirical; full of repartee; and a little
too forward in conversation, or, as we call it in English, bold, though
perfectly modest in my behaviour. Being French born, I danced, as some
say, naturally, loved it extremely, and sang well also, and so well
that, as you will hear, it was afterwards some advantage to me. With
all these things, I wanted neither wit, beauty, or money. In this manner
I set out into the world, having all the advantages that any young woman
could desire, to recommend me to others, and form a prospect of happy
living to myself.

At about fifteen years of age, my father gave me, as he called it in
French, 25,000 livres, that is to say, two thousand pounds portion, and
married me to an eminent brewer in the city. Pardon me if I conceal his
name; for though he was the foundation of my ruin, I cannot take so
severe a revenge upon him.

With this thing called a husband I lived eight years in good fashion,
and for some part of the time kept a coach, that is to say, a kind of
mock coach; for all the week the horses were kept at work in the
dray-carts; but on Sunday I had the privilege to go abroad in my
chariot, either to church or otherways, as my husband and I could agree
about it, which, by the way, was not very often; but of that hereafter.

Before I proceed in the history of the married part of my life, you must
allow me to give as impartial an account of my husband as I have done of
myself. He was a jolly, handsome fellow, as any woman need wish for a
companion; tall and well made; rather a little too large, but not so as
to be ungenteel; he danced well, which I think was the first thing that
brought us together. He had an old father who managed the business
carefully, so that he had little of that part lay on him, but now and
then to appear and show himself; and he took the advantage of it, for he
troubled himself very little about it, but went abroad, kept company,
hunted much, and loved it exceedingly.

After I have told you that he was a handsome man and a good sportsman, I
have indeed said all; and unhappy was I, like other young people of our
sex, I chose him for being a handsome, jolly fellow, as I have said; for
he was otherwise a weak, empty-headed, untaught creature, as any woman
could ever desire to be coupled with. And here I must take the liberty,
whatever I have to reproach myself with in my after conduct, to turn to
my fellow-creatures, the young ladies of this country, and speak to them
by way of precaution. If you have any regard to your future happiness,
any view of living comfortably with a husband, any hope of preserving
your fortunes, or restoring them after any disaster, never, ladies,
marry a fool; any husband rather than a fool. With some other husbands
you may be unhappy, but with a fool you will be miserable; with another
husband you may, I say, be unhappy, but with a fool you must; nay, if he
would, he cannot make you easy; everything he does is so awkward,
everything he says is so empty, a woman of any sense cannot but be
surfeited and sick of him twenty times a day. What is more shocking than
for a woman to bring a handsome, comely fellow of a husband into
company, and then be obliged to blush for him every time she hears him
speak? to hear other gentlemen talk sense, and he able to say nothing?
and so look like a fool, or, which is worse, hear him talk nonsense, and
be laughed at for a fool.

In the next place, there are so many sorts of fools, such an infinite
variety of fools, and so hard it is to know the worst of the kind, that
I am obliged to say, "No fool, ladies, at all, no kind of fool, whether
a mad fool or a sober fool, a wise fool or a silly fool; take anything
but a fool; nay, be anything, be even an old maid, the worst of nature's
curses, rather than take up with a fool."

But to leave this awhile, for I shall have occasion to speak of it
again; my case was particularly hard, for I had a variety of foolish
things complicated in this unhappy match.

First, and which I must confess is very unsufferable, he was a conceited
fool, _tout opiniatre_; everything he said was right, was best, and was
to the purpose, whoever was in company, and whatever was advanced by
others, though with the greatest modesty imaginable. And yet, when he
came to defend what he had said by argument and reason, he would do it
so weakly, so emptily, and so nothing to the purpose, that it was enough
to make anybody that heard him sick and ashamed of him.

Secondly, he was positive and obstinate, and the most positive in the
most simple and inconsistent things, such as were intolerable to bear.

These two articles, if there had been no more, qualified him to be a
most unbearable creature for a husband; and so it may be supposed at
first sight what a kind of life I led with him. However, I did as well
as I could, and held my tongue, which was the only victory I gained over
him; for when he would talk after his own empty rattling way with me,
and I would not answer, or enter into discourse with him on the point he
was upon, he would rise up in the greatest passion imaginable, and go
away, which was the cheapest way I had to be delivered.

I could enlarge here much upon the method I took to make my life
passable and easy with the most incorrigible temper in the world; but it
is too long, and the articles too trifling. I shall mention some of them
as the circumstances I am to relate shall necessarily bring them in.

After I had been married about four years, my own father died, my mother
having been dead before. He liked my match so ill, and saw so little
room to be satisfied with the conduct of my husband, that though he left
me five thousand livres, and more, at his death, yet he left it in the
hands of my elder brother, who, running on too rashly in his adventures
as a merchant, failed, and lost not only what he had, but what he had
for me too, as you shall hear presently.

Thus I lost the last gift of my father's bounty by having a husband not
fit to be trusted with it: there's one of the benefits of marrying a
fool.

Within two years after my own father's death my husband's father also
died, and, as I thought, left him a considerable addition to his estate,
the whole trade of the brewhouse, which was a very good one, being now
his own.

But this addition to his stock was his ruin, for he had no genius to
business, he had no knowledge of his accounts; he bustled a little about
it, indeed, at first, and put on a face of business, but he soon grew
slack; it was below him to inspect his books, he committed all that to
his clerks and book-keepers; and while he found money in cash to pay the
maltman and the excise, and put some in his pocket, he was perfectly
easy and indolent, let the main chance go how it would.

I foresaw the consequence of this, and attempted several times to
persuade him to apply himself to his business; I put him in mind how his
customers complained of the neglect of his servants on one hand, and how
abundance broke in his debt, on the other hand, for want of the clerk's
care to secure him, and the like; but he thrust me by, either with hard
words, or fraudulently, with representing the cases otherwise than they
were.

However, to cut short a dull story, which ought not to be long, he began
to find his trade sunk, his stock declined, and that, in short, he could
not carry on his business, and once or twice his brewing utensils were
extended for the excise; and, the last time, he was put to great
extremities to clear them.

This alarmed him, and he resolved to lay down his trade; which, indeed,
I was not sorry for; foreseeing that if he did not lay it down in time,
he would be forced to do it another way, namely, as a bankrupt. Also I
was willing he should draw out while he had something left, lest I
should come to be stripped at home, and be turned out of doors with my
children; for I had now five children by him, the only work (perhaps)
that fools are good for.

I thought myself happy when he got another man to take his brewhouse
clear off his hands; for, paying down a large sum of money, my husband
found himself a clear man, all his debts paid, and with between two and
three thousand pounds in his pocket; and being now obliged to remove
from the brewhouse, we took a house at ----, a village about two miles
out of town; and happy I thought myself, all things considered, that I
was got off clear, upon so good terms; and had my handsome fellow had
but one capful of wit, I had been still well enough.

I proposed to him either to buy some place with the money, or with part
of it, and offered to join my part to it, which was then in being, and
might have been secured; so we might have lived tolerably at least
during his life. But as it is the part of a fool to be void of counsel,
so he neglected it, lived on as he did before, kept his horses and men,
rid every day out to the forest a-hunting, and nothing was done all this
while; but the money decreased apace, and I thought I saw my ruin
hastening on without any possible way to prevent it.

I was not wanting with all that persuasions and entreaties could
perform, but it was all fruitless; representing to him how fast our
money wasted, and what would be our condition when it was gone, made no
impression on him; but like one stupid, he went on, not valuing all that
tears and lamentations could be supposed to do; nor did he abate his
figure or equipage, his horses or servants, even to the last, till he
had not a hundred pounds left in the whole world.

It was not above three years that all the ready money was thus spending
off; yet he spent it, as I may say, foolishly too, for he kept no
valuable company neither, but generally with huntsmen and
horse-coursers, and men meaner than himself, which is another
consequence of a man's being a fool; such can never take delight in men
more wise and capable than themselves, and that makes them converse
with scoundrels, drink, belch with porters, and keep company always
below themselves.

This was my wretched condition, when one morning my husband told me he
was sensible he was come to a miserable condition, and he would go and
seek his fortune somewhere or other. He had said something to that
purpose several times before that, upon my pressing him to consider his
circumstances, and the circumstances of his family, before it should be
too late; but as I found he had no meaning in anything of that kind, as,
indeed, he had not much in anything he ever said, so I thought they were
but words of course now. When he had said he would be gone, I used to
wish secretly, and even say in my thoughts, I wish you would, for if you
go on thus you will starve us all.

He stayed, however, at home all that day, and lay at home that night;
early the next morning he gets out of bed, goes to a window which looked
out towards the stable, and sounds his French horn, as he called it,
which was his usual signal to call his men to go out a-hunting.

It was about the latter end of August, and so was light yet at five
o'clock, and it was about that time that I heard him and his two men go
out and shut the yard gates after them. He said nothing to me more than
as usual when he used to go out upon his sport; neither did I rise, or
say anything to him that was material, but went to sleep again after he
was gone, for two hours or thereabouts.

It must be a little surprising to the reader to tell him at once, that
after this I never saw my husband more; but, to go farther, I not only
never saw him more, but I never heard from him, or of him, neither of
any or either of his two servants, or of the horses, either what became
of them, where or which way they went, or what they did or intended to
do, no more than if the ground had opened and swallowed them all up, and
nobody had known it, except as hereafter.

I was not, for the first night or two, at all surprised, no, nor very
much the first week or two, believing that if anything evil had befallen
them, I should soon enough have heard of that; and also knowing, that as
he had two servants and three horses with him, it would be the strangest
thing in the world that anything could befall them all but that I must
some time or other hear of them.

But you will easily allow, that as time ran on, a week, two weeks, a
month, two months, and so on, I was dreadfully frighted at last, and the
more when I looked into my own circumstances, and considered the
condition in which I was left with five children, and not one farthing
subsistence for them, other than about seventy pounds in money, and what
few things of value I had about me, which, though considerable in
themselves, were yet nothing to feed a family, and for a length of time
too.

[Illustration: THE BREWER AND HIS MEN

I heard him and his two men go out and shut the yard gates after them]

What to do I knew not, nor to whom to have recourse: to keep in the
house where I was, I could not, the rent being too great; and to leave
it without his orders, if my husband should return, I could not think of
that neither; so that I continued extremely perplexed, melancholy, and
discouraged to the last degree.

I remained in this dejected condition near a twelvemonth. My husband had
two sisters, who were married, and lived very well, and some other near
relations that I knew of, and I hoped would do something for me; and I
frequently sent to these, to know if they could give me any account of
my vagrant creature. But they all declared to me in answer, that they
knew nothing about him; and, after frequent sending, began to think me
troublesome, and to let me know they thought so too, by their treating
my maid with very slight and unhandsome returns to her inquiries.

This grated hard, and added to my affliction; but I had no recourse but
to my tears, for I had not a friend of my own left me in the world. I
should have observed, that it was about half a year before this
elopement of my husband that the disaster I mentioned above befell my
brother, who broke, and that in such bad circumstances, that I had the
mortification to hear, not only that he was in prison, but that there
would be little or nothing to be had by way of composition.

Misfortunes seldom come alone: this was the forerunner of my husband's
flight; and as my expectations were cut off on that side, my husband
gone, and my family of children on my hands, and nothing to subsist
them, my condition was the most deplorable that words can express.

I had some plate and some jewels, as might be supposed, my fortune and
former circumstances considered; and my husband, who had never stayed to
be distressed, had not been put to the necessity of rifling me, as
husbands usually do in such cases. But as I had seen an end of all the
ready money during the long time I had lived in a state of expectation
for my husband, so I began to make away one thing after another, till
those few things of value which I had began to lessen apace, and I saw
nothing but misery and the utmost distress before me, even to have my
children starve before my face. I leave any one that is a mother of
children, and has lived in plenty and in good fashion, to consider and
reflect what must be my condition. As to my husband, I had now no hope
or expectation of seeing him any more; and indeed, if I had, he was a
man of all the men in the world the least able to help me, or to have
turned his hand to the gaining one shilling towards lessening our
distress; he neither had the capacity or the inclination; he could have
been no clerk, for he scarce wrote a legible hand; he was so far from
being able to write sense, that he could not make sense of what others
wrote; he was so far from understanding good English, that he could not
spell good English; to be out of all business was his delight, and he
would stand leaning against a post for half-an-hour together, with a
pipe in his mouth, with all the tranquillity in the world, smoking, like
Dryden's countryman, that whistled as he went for want of thought, and
this even when his family was, as it were, starving, that little he had
wasting, and that we were all bleeding to death; he not knowing, and as
little considering, where to get another shilling when the last was
spent.

This being his temper, and the extent of his capacity, I confess I did
not see so much loss in his parting with me as at first I thought I did;
though it was hard and cruel to the last degree in him, not giving me
the least notice of his design; and indeed, that which I was most
astonished at was, that seeing he must certainly have intended this
excursion some few moments at least before he put it in practice, yet he
did not come and take what little stock of money we had left, or at
least a share of it, to bear his expense for a little while; but he did
not; and I am morally certain he had not five guineas with him in the
world when he went away. All that I could come to the knowledge of about
him was, that he left his hunting-horn, which he called the French horn,
in the stable, and his hunting-saddle, went away in a handsome
furniture, as they call it, which he used sometimes to travel with,
having an embroidered housing, a case of pistols, and other things
belonging to them; and one of his servants had another saddle with
pistols, though plain, and the other a long gun; so that they did not go
out as sportsmen, but rather as travellers; what part of the world they
went to I never heard for many years.

As I have said, I sent to his relations, but they sent me short and
surly answers; nor did any one of them offer to come to see me, or to
see the children, or so much as to inquire after them, well perceiving
that I was in a condition that was likely to be soon troublesome to
them. But it was no time now to dally with them or with the world; I
left off sending to them, and went myself among them, laid my
circumstances open to them, told them my whole case, and the condition I
was reduced to, begged they would advise me what course to take, laid
myself as low as they could desire, and entreated them to consider that
I was not in a condition to help myself, and that without some
assistance we must all inevitably perish. I told them that if I had had
but one child, or two children, I would have done my endeavour to have
worked for them with my needle, and should only have come to them to beg
them to help me to some work, that I might get our bread by my labour;
but to think of one single woman, not bred to work, and at a loss where
to get employment, to get the bread of five children, that was not
possible--some of my children being young too, and none of them big
enough to help one another.

It was all one; I received not one farthing of assistance from anybody,
was hardly asked to sit down at the two sisters' houses, nor offered to
eat or drink at two more near relations'. The fifth, an ancient
gentlewoman, aunt-in-law to my husband, a widow, and the least able also
of any of the rest, did, indeed, ask me to sit down, gave me a dinner,
and refreshed me with a kinder treatment than any of the rest, but added
the melancholy part, viz., that she would have helped me, but that,
indeed, she was not able, which, however, I was satisfied was very true.

Here I relieved myself with the constant assistant of the afflicted, I
mean tears; for, relating to her how I was received by the other of my
husband's relations, it made me burst into tears, and I cried vehemently
for a great while together, till I made the good old gentlewoman cry too
several times.

However, I came home from them all without any relief, and went on at
home till I was reduced to such inexpressible distress that is not to be
described. I had been several times after this at the old aunt's, for I
prevailed with her to promise me to go and talk with the other
relations, at least, that, if possible, she could bring some of them to
take off the children, or to contribute something towards their
maintenance. And, to do her justice, she did use her endeavour with
them; but all was to no purpose, they would do nothing, at least that
way. I think, with much entreaty, she obtained, by a kind of collection
among them all, about eleven or twelve shillings in money, which, though
it was a present comfort, was yet not to be named as capable to deliver
me from any part of the load that lay upon me.

There was a poor woman that had been a kind of a dependent upon our
family, and whom I had often, among the rest of the relations, been very
kind to; my maid put it into my head one morning to send to this poor
woman, and to see whether she might not be able to help in this dreadful
case.

I must remember it here, to the praise of this poor girl, my maid, that
though I was not able to give her any wages, and had told her so--nay, I
was not able to pay her the wages that I was in arrears to her--yet she
would not leave me; nay, and as long as she had any money, when I had
none, she would help me out of her own, for which, though I acknowledged
her kindness and fidelity, yet it was but a bad coin that she was paid
in at last, as will appear in its place.

Amy (for that was her name) put it into my thoughts to send for this
poor woman to come to me; for I was now in great distress, and I
resolved to do so. But just the very morning that I intended it, the old
aunt, with the poor woman in her company, came to see me; the good old
gentlewoman was, it seems, heartily concerned for me, and had been
talking again among those people, to see what she could do for me, but
to very little purpose.

You shall judge a little of my present distress by the posture she found
me in. I had five little children, the eldest was under ten years old,
and I had not one shilling in the house to buy them victuals, but had
sent Amy out with a silver spoon to sell it, and bring home something
from the butcher's; and I was in a parlour, sitting on the ground, with
a great heap of old rags, linen, and other things about me, looking them
over, to see if I had anything among them that would sell or pawn for a
little money, and had been crying ready to burst myself, to think what I
should do next.

At this juncture they knocked at the door. I thought it had been Amy,
so I did not rise up; but one of the children opened the door, and they
came directly into the room where I was, and where they found me in that
posture, and crying vehemently, as above. I was surprised at their
coming, you may be sure, especially seeing the person I had but just
before resolved to send for; but when they saw me, how I looked, for my
eyes were swelled with crying, and what a condition I was in as to the
house, and the heaps of things that were about me, and especially when I
told them what I was doing, and on what occasion, they sat down, like
Job's three comforters, and said not one word to me for a great while,
but both of them cried as fast and as heartily as I did.

The truth was, there was no need of much discourse in the case, the
thing spoke itself; they saw me in rags and dirt, who was but a little
before riding in my coach; thin, and looking almost like one starved,
who was before fat and beautiful. The house, that was before handsomely
furnished with pictures and ornaments, cabinets, pier-glasses, and
everything suitable, was now stripped and naked, most of the goods
having been seized by the landlord for rent, or sold to buy necessaries;
in a word, all was misery and distress, the face of ruin was everywhere
to be seen; we had eaten up almost everything, and little remained,
unless, like one of the pitiful women of Jerusalem, I should eat up my
very children themselves.

After these two good creatures had sat, as I say, in silence some time,
and had then looked about them, my maid Amy came in, and brought with
her a small breast of mutton and two great bunches of turnips, which she
intended to stew for our dinner. As for me, my heart was so overwhelmed
at seeing these two friends--for such they were, though poor--and at
their seeing me in such a condition, that I fell into another violent
fit of crying, so that, in short, I could not speak to them again for a
great while longer.

During my being in such an agony, they went to my maid Amy at another
part of the same room and talked with her. Amy told them all my
circumstances, and set them forth in such moving terms, and so to the
life, that I could not upon any terms have done it like her myself, and,
in a word, affected them both with it in such a manner, that the old
aunt came to me, and though hardly able to speak for tears, "Look ye,
cousin," said she, in a few words, "things must not stand thus; some
course must be taken, and that forthwith; pray, where were these
children born?" I told her the parish where we lived before, that four
of them were born there, and one in the house where I now was, where the
landlord, after having seized my goods for the rent past, not then
knowing my circumstances, had now given me leave to live for a whole
year more without any rent, being moved with compassion; but that this
year was now almost expired.

Upon hearing this account, they came to this resolution, that the
children should be all carried by them to the door of one of the
relations mentioned above, and be set down there by the maid Amy, and
that I, the mother, should remove for some days, shut up the doors, and
be gone; that the people should be told, that if they did not think fit
to take some care of the children, they might send for the churchwardens
if they thought that better, for that they were born in that parish, and
there they must be provided for; as for the other child, which was born
in the parish of ----, that was already taken care of by the parish
officers there, for indeed they were so sensible of the distress of the
family that they had at first word done what was their part to do.

This was what these good women proposed, and bade me leave the rest to
them. I was at first sadly afflicted at the thoughts of parting with my
children, and especially at that terrible thing, their being taken into
the parish keeping; and then a hundred terrible things came into my
thoughts, viz., of parish children being starved at nurse; of their
being ruined, let grow crooked, lamed, and the like, for want of being
taken care of; and this sunk my very heart within me.

But the misery of my own circumstances hardened my heart against my own
flesh and blood; and when I considered they must inevitably be starved,
and I too if I continued to keep them about me, I began to be reconciled
to parting with them all, anyhow and anywhere, that I might be freed
from the dreadful necessity of seeing them all perish, and perishing
with them myself. So I agreed to go away out of the house, and leave the
management of the whole matter to my maid Amy and to them; and
accordingly I did so, and the same afternoon they carried them all away
to one of their aunts.

Amy, a resolute girl, knocked at the door, with the children all with
her, and bade the eldest, as soon as the door was open, run in, and the
rest after her. She set them all down at the door before she knocked,
and when she knocked she stayed till a maid-servant came to the door;
"Sweetheart," said she, "pray go in and tell your mistress here are her
little cousins come to see her from ----," naming the town where we
lived, at which the maid offered to go back. "Here, child," says Amy,
"take one of 'em in your hand, and I'll bring the rest;" so she gives
her the least, and the wench goes in mighty innocently, with the little
one in her hand, upon which Amy turns the rest in after her, shuts the
door softly, and marches off as fast as she could.

Just in the interval of this, and even while the maid and her mistress
were quarrelling (for the mistress raved and scolded her like a mad
woman, and had ordered her to go and stop the maid Amy, and turn all the
children out of the doors again; but she had been at the door, and Amy
was gone, and the wench was out of her wits, and the mistress too), I
say, just at this juncture came the poor old woman, not the aunt, but
the other of the two that had been with me, and knocks at the door: the
aunt did not go, because she had pretended to advocate for me, and they
would have suspected her of some contrivance; but as for the other
woman, they did not so much as know that she had kept up any
correspondence with me.

Amy and she had concerted this between them, and it was well enough
contrived that they did so. When she came into the house, the mistress
was fuming, and raging like one distracted, and called the maid all the
foolish jades and sluts that she could think of, and that she would take
the children and turn them all out into the streets. The good poor
woman, seeing her in such a passion, turned about as if she would be
gone again, and said, "Madam, I'll come again another time, I see you
are engaged." "No, no, Mrs. ----," says the mistress, "I am not much
engaged, sit down; this senseless creature here has brought in my fool
of a brother's whole house of children upon me, and tells me that a
wench brought them to the door and thrust them in, and bade her carry
them to me; but it shall be no disturbance to me, for I have ordered
them to be set in the street without the door, and so let the
churchwardens take care of them, or else make this dull jade carry 'em
back to ---- again, and let her that brought them into the world look
after them if she will; what does she send her brats to me for?"

"The last indeed had been the best of the two," says the poor woman, "if
it had been to be done; and that brings me to tell you my errand, and
the occasion of my coming, for I came on purpose about this very
business, and to have prevented this being put upon you if I could, but
I see I am come too late."

"How do you mean too late?" says the mistress. "What! have you been
concerned in this affair, then? What! have you helped bring this family
slur upon us?" "I hope you do not think such a thing of me, madam," says
the poor woman; "but I went this morning to ----, to see my old mistress
and benefactor, for she had been very kind to me, and when I came to the
door I found all fast locked and bolted, and the house looking as if
nobody was at home.

"I knocked at the door, but nobody came, till at last some of the
neighbours' servants called to me and said, 'There's nobody lives there,
mistress; what do you knock for?' I seemed surprised at that. 'What,
nobody lives there!' said I; 'what d'ye mean? Does not Mrs. ---- live
there?' The answer was, 'No, she is gone;' at which I parleyed with one
of them, and asked her what was the matter. 'Matter!' says she, 'why, it
is matter enough: the poor gentlewoman has lived there all alone, and
without anything to subsist her a long time, and this morning the
landlord turned her out of doors.'

"'Out of doors!' says I; 'what! with all her children? Poor lambs, what
is become of them?' 'Why, truly, nothing worse,' said they, 'can come to
them than staying here, for they were almost starved with hunger; so the
neighbours, seeing the poor lady in such distress, for she stood crying
and wringing her hands over her children like one distracted, sent for
the churchwardens to take care of the children; and they, when they
came, took the youngest, which was born in this parish, and have got it
a very good nurse, and taken care of it; but as for the other four, they
had sent them away to some of their father's relations, and who were
very substantial people, and who, besides that, lived in the parish
where they were born.'

"I was not so surprised at this as not presently to foresee that this
trouble would be brought upon you or upon Mr. ----; so I came immediately
to bring word of it, that you might be prepared for it, and might not be
surprised; but I see they have been too nimble for me, so that I know
not what to advise. The poor woman, it seems, is turned out of doors
into the street; and another of the neighbours there told me, that when
they took her children from her she swooned away, and when they
recovered her out of that, she ran distracted, and is put into a
madhouse by the parish, for there is nobody else to take any care of
her."

This was all acted to the life by this good, kind, poor creature; for
though her design was perfectly good and charitable, yet there was not
one word of it true in fact; for I was not turned out of doors by the
landlord, nor gone distracted. It was true, indeed, that at parting with
my poor children I fainted, and was like one mad when I came to myself
and found they were gone; but I remained in the house a good while after
that, as you shall hear.

While the poor woman was telling this dismal story, in came the
gentlewoman's husband, and though her heart was hardened against all
pity, who was really and nearly related to the children, for they were
the children of her own brother, yet the good man was quite softened
with the dismal relation of the circumstances of the family; and when
the poor woman had done, he said to his wife, "This is a dismal case,
my dear, indeed, and something must be done." His wife fell a-raving at
him: "What," says she, "do you want to have four children to keep? Have
we not children of our own? Would you have these brats come and eat up
my children's bread? No, no, let 'em go to the parish, and let them take
care of them; I'll take care of my own."

"Come, come, my dear," says the husband, "charity is a duty to the poor,
and he that gives to the poor lends to the Lord; let us lend our
heavenly Father a little of our children's bread, as you call it; it
will be a store well laid up for them, and will be the best security
that our children shall never come to want charity, or be turned out of
doors, as these poor innocent creatures are." "Don't tell me of
security," says the wife, "'tis a good security for our children to keep
what we have together, and provide for them, and then 'tis time enough
to help keep other folks' children. Charity begins at home."

"Well, my dear," says he again, "I only talk of putting out a little
money to interest: our Maker is a good borrower; never fear making a bad
debt there, child, I'll be bound for it."

"Don't banter me with your charity and your allegories," says the wife
angrily; "I tell you they are my relations, not yours, and they shall
not roost here; they shall go to the parish."

"All your relations are my relations now," says the good gentleman very
calmly, "and I won't see your relations in distress, and not pity them,
any more than I would my own; indeed, my dear, they shan't go to the
parish. I assure you, none of my wife's relations shall come to the
parish, if I can help it."

"What! will you take four children to keep?" says the wife.

"No, no, my dear," says he, "there's your sister ----, I'll go and talk
with her; and your uncle ----, I'll send for him, and the rest. I'll
warrant you, when we are all together, we will find ways and means to
keep four poor little creatures from beggary and starving, or else it
would be very hard; we are none of us in so bad circumstances but we are
able to spare a mite for the fatherless. Don't shut up your bowels of
compassion against your own flesh and blood. Could you hear these poor
innocent children cry at your door for hunger, and give them no bread?"

"Prithee, what need they cry at our door?" says she. "'Tis the business
of the parish to provide for them; they shan't cry at our door. If they
do, I'll give them nothing." "Won't you?" says he; "but I will. Remember
that dreadful Scripture is directly against us, Prov. xxi. 13, 'Whoso
stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but
shall not be heard.'"

"Well, well," says she, "you must do what you will, because you pretend
to be master; but if I had my will I would send them where they ought to
be sent: I would send them from whence they came."

Then the poor woman put in, and said, "But, madam, that is sending them
to starve indeed, for the parish has no obligation to take care of 'em,
and so they will lie and perish in the street."

"Or be sent back again," says the husband, "to our parish in a
cripple-cart, by the justice's warrant, and so expose us and all the
relations to the last degree among our neighbours, and among those who
know the good old gentleman their grandfather, who lived and flourished
in this parish so many years, and was so well beloved among all people,
and deserved it so well."

"I don't value that one farthing, not I," says the wife; "I'll keep none
of them."

"Well, my dear," says her husband, "but I value it, for I won't have
such a blot lie upon the family, and upon your children; he was a
worthy, ancient, and good man, and his name is respected among all his
neighbours; it will be a reproach to you, that are his daughter, and to
our children, that are his grandchildren, that we should let your
brother's children perish, or come to be a charge to the public, in the
very place where your family once flourished. Come, say no more; I will
see what can be done."

Upon this he sends and gathers all the relations together at a tavern
hard by, and sent for the four little children, that they might see
them; and they all, at first word, agreed to have them taken care of,
and, because his wife was so furious that she would not suffer one of
them to be kept at home, they agreed to keep them all together for a
while; so they committed them to the poor woman that had managed the
affair for them, and entered into obligations to one another to supply
the needful sums for their maintenance; and, not to have one separated
from the rest, they sent for the youngest from the parish where it was
taken in, and had them all brought up together.

It would take up too long a part of this story to give a particular
account with what a charitable tenderness this good person, who was but
an uncle-in-law to them, managed that affair; how careful he was of
them; went constantly to see them, and to see that they were well
provided for, clothed, put to school, and, at last, put out in the world
for their advantage; but it is enough to say he acted more like a father
to them than an uncle-in-law, though all along much against his wife's
consent, who was of a disposition not so tender and compassionate as
her husband.

You may believe I heard this with the same pleasure which I now feel at
the relating it again; for I was terribly affrighted at the
apprehensions of my children being brought to misery and distress, as
those must be who have no friends, but are left to parish benevolence.

I was now, however, entering on a new scene of life. I had a great house
upon my hands, and some furniture left in it; but I was no more able to
maintain myself and my maid Amy in it than I was my five children; nor
had I anything to subsist with but what I might get by working, and that
was not a town where much work was to be had.

My landlord had been very kind indeed after he came to know my
circumstances; though, before he was acquainted with that part, he had
gone so far as to seize my goods, and to carry some of them off too.

But I had lived three-quarters of a year in his house after that, and
had paid him no rent, and, which was worse, I was in no condition to pay
him any. However, I observed he came oftener to see me, looked kinder
upon me, and spoke more friendly to me, than he used to do, particularly
the last two or three times he had been there. He observed, he said, how
poorly I lived, how low I was reduced, and the like; told me it grieved
him for my sake; and the last time of all he was kinder still, told me
he came to dine with me, and that I should give him leave to treat me;
so he called my maid Amy, and sent her out to buy a joint of meat; he
told her what she should buy; but naming two or three things, either of
which she might take, the maid, a cunning wench, and faithful to me as
the skin to my back, did not buy anything outright, but brought the
butcher along with her, with both the things that she had chosen, for
him to please himself. The one was a large, very good leg of veal; the
other a piece of the fore-ribs of roasting beef. He looked at them, but
made me chaffer with the butcher for him, and I did so, and came back to
him and told him what the butcher had demanded for either of them, and
what each of them came to. So he pulls out eleven shillings and
threepence, which they came to together, and bade me take them both; the
rest, he said, would serve another time.

I was surprised, you may be sure, at the bounty of a man that had but a
little while ago been my terror, and had torn the goods out of my house
like a fury; but I considered that my distresses had mollified his
temper, and that he had afterwards been so compassionate as to give me
leave to live rent free in the house a whole year.

But now he put on the face, not of a man of compassion only, but of a
man of friendship and kindness, and this was so unexpected that it was
surprising. We chatted together, and were, as I may call it, cheerful,
which was more than I could say I had been for three years before. He
sent for wine and beer too, for I had none; poor Amy and I had drank
nothing but water for many weeks, and indeed I have often wondered at
the faithful temper of the poor girl, for which I but ill requited her
at last.

When Amy was come with the wine, he made her fill a glass to him, and
with the glass in his hand he came to me and kissed me, which I was, I
confess, a little surprised at, but more at what followed; for he told
me, that as the sad condition which I was reduced to had made him pity
me, so my conduct in it, and the courage I bore it with, had given him a
more than ordinary respect for me, and made him very thoughtful for my
good; that he was resolved for the present to do something to relieve
me, and to employ his thoughts in the meantime, to see if he could for
the future put me into a way to support myself.

While he found me change colour, and look surprised at his discourse,
for so I did, to be sure, he turns to my maid Amy, and looking at her,
he says to me, "I say all this, madam, before your maid, because both
she and you shall know that I have no ill design, and that I have, in
mere kindness, resolved to do something for you if I can; and as I have
been a witness of the uncommon honesty and fidelity of Mrs. Amy here to
you in all your distresses, I know she may be trusted with so honest a
design as mine is; for I assure you, I bear a proportioned regard to
your maid too, for her affection to you."

Amy made him a curtsey, and the poor girl looked so confounded with joy
that she could not speak, but her colour came and went, and every now
and then she blushed as red as scarlet, and the next minute looked as
pale as death. Well, having said this, he sat down, made me sit down,
and then drank to me, and made me drink two glasses of wine together;
"For," says he, "you have need of it;" and so indeed I had. When he had
done so, "Come, Amy," says he, "with your mistress's leave, you shall
have a glass too." So he made her drink two glasses also; and then
rising up, "And now, Amy," says he, "go and get dinner; and you, madam,"
says he to me, "go up and dress you, and come down and smile and be
merry;" adding, "I'll make you easy if I can;" and in the meantime, he
said, he would walk in the garden.

When he was gone, Amy changed her countenance indeed, and looked as
merry as ever she did in her life. "Dear madam," says she, "what does
this gentleman mean?" "Nay, Amy," said I, "he means to do us good, you
see, don't he? I know no other meaning he can have, for he can get
nothing by me." "I warrant you, madam," says she, "he'll ask you a
favour by-and-by." "No, no, you are mistaken, Amy, I dare say," said I;
"you have heard what he said, didn't you?" "Ay," says Amy, "it's no
matter for that, you shall see what he will do after dinner." "Well,
well, Amy," says I, "you have hard thoughts of him. I cannot be of your
opinion: I don't see anything in him yet that looks like it." "As to
that, madam," says Amy, "I don't see anything of it yet neither; but
what should move a gentleman to take pity of us as he does?" "Nay," says
I, "that's a hard thing too, that we should judge a man to be wicked
because he's charitable, and vicious because he's kind." "Oh, madam,"
says Amy, "there's abundance of charity begins in that vice; and he is
not so unacquainted with things as not to know that poverty is the
strongest incentive--a temptation against which no virtue is powerful
enough to stand out. He knows your condition as well as you do." "Well,
and what then?" "Why, then, he knows too that you are young and
handsome, and he has the surest bait in the world to take you with."

"Well, Amy," said I, "but he may find himself mistaken too in such a
thing as that." "Why, madam," says Amy, "I hope you won't deny him if he
should offer it."

"What d'ye mean by that, hussy?" said I. "No, I'd starve first."

"I hope not, madam, I hope you would be wiser; I'm sure if he will set
you up, as he talks of, you ought to deny him nothing; and you will
starve if you do not consent, that's certain."

"What! consent to lie with him for bread? Amy," said I, "how can you
talk so!"

"Nay, madam," says Amy, "I don't think you would for anything else; it
would not be lawful for anything else, but for bread, madam; why, nobody
can starve, there's no bearing that, I'm sure."

"Ay," says I, "but if he would give me an estate to live on, he should
not lie with me, I assure you."

"Why, look you, madam; if he would but give you enough to live easy
upon, he should lie with me for it with all my heart."

"That's a token, Amy, of inimitable kindness to me," said I, "and I know
how to value it; but there's more friendship than honesty in it, Amy."

"Oh, madam," says Amy, "I'd do anything to get you out of this sad
condition; as to honesty, I think honesty is out of the question when
starving is the case. Are not we almost starved to death?"

"I am indeed," said I, "and thou art for my sake; but to be a whore,
Amy!" and there I stopped.

"Dear madam," says Amy, "if I will starve for your sake, I will be a
whore or anything for your sake; why, I would die for you if I were put
to it."

"Why, that's an excess of affection, Amy," said I, "I never met with
before; I wish I may be ever in condition to make you some returns
suitable. But, however, Amy, you shall not be a whore to him, to oblige
him to be kind to me; no, Amy, nor I won't be a whore to him, if he
would give me much more than he is able to give me or do for me."

"Why, madam," says Amy, "I don't say I will go and ask him; but I say,
if he should promise to do so and so for you, and the condition was such
that he would not serve you unless I would let him lie with me, he
should lie with me as often as he would, rather than you should not have
his assistance. But this is but talk, madam; I don't see any need of
such discourse, and you are of opinion that there will be no need of
it."

"Indeed so I am, Amy; but," said I, "if there was, I tell you again, I'd
die before I would consent, or before you should consent for my sake."

Hitherto I had not only preserved the virtue itself, but the virtuous
inclination and resolution; and had I kept myself there I had been
happy, though I had perished of mere hunger; for, without question, a
woman ought rather to die than to prostitute her virtue and honour, let
the temptation be what it will.

But to return to my story; he walked about the garden, which was,
indeed, all in disorder, and overrun with weeds, because I had not been
able to hire a gardener to do anything to it, no, not so much as to dig
up ground enough to sow a few turnips and carrots for family use. After
he had viewed it, he came in, and sent Amy to fetch a poor man, a
gardener, that used to help our man-servant, and carried him into the
garden, and ordered him to do several things in it, to put it into a
little order; and this took him up near an hour.

By this time I had dressed me as well as I could; for though I had good
linen left still, yet I had but a poor head-dress, and no knots, but old
fragments; no necklace, no earrings; all those things were gone long ago
for mere bread.

However, I was tight and clean, and in better plight than he had seen me
in a great while, and he looked extremely pleased to see me so; for, he
said, I looked so disconsolate and so afflicted before, that it grieved
him to see me; and he bade me pluck up a good heart, for he hoped to put
me in a condition to live in the world, and be beholden to nobody.

I told him that was impossible, for I must be beholden to him for it,
for all the friends I had in the world would not or could not do so much
for me as that he spoke of "Well, widow," says he (so he called me, and
so indeed I was in the worst sense that desolate word could be used
in), "if you are beholden to me, you shall be beholden to nobody else."

By this time dinner was ready, and Amy came in to lay the cloth, and
indeed it was happy there was none to dine but he and I, for I had but
six plates left in the house, and but two dishes; however, he knew how
things were, and bade me make no scruple about bringing out what I had.
He hoped to see me in a better plight. He did not come, he said, to be
entertained, but to entertain me, and comfort and encourage me. Thus he
went on, speaking so cheerfully to me, and such cheerful things, that it
was a cordial to my very soul to hear him speak.

Well, we went to dinner. I'm sure I had not ate a good meal hardly in a
twelvemonth, at least not of such a joint of meat as the loin of veal
was. I ate, indeed, very heartily, and so did he, and he made me drink
three or four glasses of wine; so that, in short, my spirits were lifted
up to a degree I had not been used to, and I was not only cheerful, but
merry; and so he pressed me to be.

I told him I had a great deal of reason to be merry, seeing he had been
so kind to me, and had given me hopes of recovering me from the worst
circumstances that ever woman of any sort of fortune was sunk into; that
he could not but believe that what he had said to me was like life from
the dead; that it was like recovering one sick from the brink of the
grave; how I should ever make him a return any way suitable was what I
had not yet had time to think of; I could only say that I should never
forget it while I had life, and should be always ready to acknowledge
it.

He said that was all he desired of me; that his reward would be the
satisfaction of having rescued me from misery; that he found he was
obliging one that knew what gratitude meant; that he would make it his
business to make me completely easy, first or last, if it lay in his
power; and in the meantime he bade me consider of anything that I
thought he might do for me, for my advantage, and in order to make me
perfectly easy.

After we had talked thus, he bade me be cheerful. "Come," says he, "lay
aside these melancholy things, and let us be merry." Amy waited at the
table, and she smiled and laughed, and was so merry she could hardly
contain it, for the girl loved me to an excess hardly to be described;
and it was such an unexpected thing to hear any one talk to her
mistress, that the wench was beside herself almost, and, as soon as
dinner was over, Amy went upstairs, and put on her best clothes too, and
came down dressed like a gentlewoman.

We sat together talking of a thousand things--of what had been, and what
was to be--all the rest of the day, and in the evening he took his
leave of me, with a thousand expressions of kindness and tenderness and
true affection to me, but offered not the least of what my maid Amy had
suggested.

At his going away he took me in his arms, protested an honest kindness
to me; said a thousand kind things to me, which I cannot now recollect;
and, after kissing me twenty times or thereabouts, put a guinea into my
hand, which, he said, was for my present supply, and told me that he
would see me again before it was out; also he gave Amy half-a-crown.

When he was gone, "Well, Amy," said I, "are you convinced now that he is
an honest as well as a true friend, and that there has been nothing, not
the least appearance of anything, of what you imagined in his
behaviour?" "Yes," says Amy, "I am, but I admire at it. He is such a
friend as the world, sure, has not abundance of to show."

"I am sure," says I, "he is such a friend as I have long wanted, and as
I have as much need of as any creature in the world has or ever had."
And, in short, I was so overcome with the comfort of it that I sat down
and cried for joy a good while, as I had formerly cried for sorrow. Amy
and I went to bed that night (for Amy lay with me) pretty early, but lay
chatting almost all night about it, and the girl was so transported that
she got up two or three times in the night and danced about the room in
her shift; in short, the girl was half distracted with the joy of it; a
testimony still of her violent affection for her mistress, in which no
servant ever went beyond her.

We heard no more of him for two days, but the third day he came again;
then he told me, with the same kindness, that he had ordered me a supply
of household goods for the furnishing the house; that, in particular, he
had sent me back all the goods that he had seized for rent, which
consisted, indeed, of the best of my former furniture. "And now," says
he, "I'll tell you what I have had in my head for you for your present
supply, and that is," says he, "that the house being well furnished, you
shall let it out to lodgings for the summer gentry," says he, "by which
you will easily get a good comfortable subsistence, especially seeing
you shall pay me no rent for two years, nor after neither, unless you
can afford it."

This was the first view I had of living comfortably indeed, and it was a
very probable way, I must confess, seeing we had very good conveniences,
six rooms on a floor, and three stories high. While he was laying down
the scheme of my management, came a cart to the door with a load of
goods, and an upholsterer's man to put them up. They were chiefly the
furniture of two rooms which he had carried away for his two years'
rent, with two fine cabinets, and some pier-glasses out of the parlour,
and several other valuable things.

These were all restored to their places, and he told me he gave them me
freely, as a satisfaction for the cruelty he had used me with before;
and the furniture of one room being finished and set up, he told me he
would furnish one chamber for himself, and would come and be one of my
lodgers, if I would give him leave.

I told him he ought not to ask me leave, who had so much right to make
himself welcome. So the house began to look in some tolerable figure,
and clean; the garden also, in about a fortnight's work, began to look
something less like a wilderness than it used to do; and he ordered me
to put up a bill for letting rooms, reserving one for himself, to come
to as he saw occasion.

When all was done to his mind, as to placing the goods, he seemed very
well pleased, and we dined together again of his own providing; and the
upholsterer's man gone, after dinner he took me by the hand. "Come now,
madam," says he, "you must show me your house" (for he had a mind to see
everything over again). "No, sir," said I; "but I'll go show you your
house, if you please;" so we went up through all the rooms, and in the
room which was appointed for himself Amy was doing something. "Well,
Amy," says he, "I intend to lie with you to-morrow night." "To-night if
you please, sir," says Amy very innocently; "your room is quite ready."
"Well, Amy," says he, "I am glad you are so willing." "No," says Amy, "I
mean your chamber is ready to-night," and away she run out of the room,
ashamed enough; for the girl meant no harm, whatever she had said to me
in private.

However, he said no more then; but when Amy was gone he walked about the
room, and looked at everything, and taking me by the hand he kissed me,
and spoke a great many kind, affectionate things to me indeed; as of his
measures for my advantage, and what he would do to raise me again in the
world; told me that my afflictions and the conduct I had shown in
bearing them to such an extremity, had so engaged him to me that he
valued me infinitely above all the women in the world; that though he
was under such engagements that he could not marry me (his wife and he
had been parted for some reasons, which make too long a story to
intermix with mine), yet that he would be everything else that a woman
could ask in a husband; and with that he kissed me again, and took me in
his arms, but offered not the least uncivil action to me, and told me he
hoped I would not deny him all the favours he should ask, because he
resolved to ask nothing of me but what it was fit for a woman of virtue
and modesty, for such he knew me to be, to yield.

I confess the terrible pressure of my former misery, the memory of which
lay heavy upon my mind, and the surprising kindness with which he had
delivered me, and, withal, the expectations of what he might still do
for me, were powerful things, and made me have scarce the power to deny
him anything he would ask. However, I told him thus, with an air of
tenderness too, that he had done so much for me that I thought I ought
to deny him nothing; only I hoped and depended upon him that he would
not take the advantage of the infinite obligations I was under to him,
to desire anything of me the yielding to which would lay me lower in his
esteem than I desired to be; that as I took him to be a man of honour,
so I knew he could not like me better for doing anything that was below
a woman of honesty and good manners to do.

He told me that he had done all this for me, without so much as telling
me what kindness or real affection he had for me, that I might not be
under any necessity of yielding to him in anything for want of bread;
and he would no more oppress my gratitude now than he would my necessity
before, nor ask anything, supposing he would stop his favours or
withdraw his kindness, if he was denied; it was true, he said, he might
tell me more freely his mind now than before, seeing I had let him see
that I accepted his assistance, and saw that he was sincere in his
design of serving me; that he had gone thus far to show me that he was
kind to me, but that now he would tell me that he loved me, and yet
would demonstrate that his love was both honourable, and that what he
should desire was what he might honestly ask and I might honestly grant.

I answered that, within those two limitations, I was sure I ought to
deny him nothing, and I should think myself not ungrateful only, but
very unjust, if I should; so he said no more, but I observed he kissed
me more, and took me in his arms in a kind of familiar way, more than
usual, and which once or twice put me in mind of my maid Amy's words;
and yet, I must acknowledge, I was so overcome with his goodness to me
in those many kind things he had done that I not only was easy at what
he did and made no resistance, but was inclined to do the like, whatever
he had offered to do. But he went no farther than what I have said, nor
did he offer so much as to sit down on the bedside with me, but took his
leave, said he loved me tenderly, and would convince me of it by such
demonstrations as should be to my satisfaction. I told him I had a great
deal of reason to believe him, that he was full master of the whole
house and of me, as far as was within the bounds we had spoken of, which
I believe he would not break, and asked him if he would not lodge there
that night.

He said he could not well stay that night, business requiring him in
London, but added, smiling, that he would come the next day and take a
night's lodging with me. I pressed him to stay that night, and told him
I should be glad a friend so valuable should be under the same roof with
me; and indeed I began at that time not only to be much obliged to him,
but to love him too, and that in a manner that I had not been acquainted
with myself.

Oh! let no woman slight the temptation that being generously delivered
from trouble is to any spirit furnished with gratitude and just
principles. This gentleman had freely and voluntarily delivered me from
misery, from poverty, and rags; he had made me what I was, and put me
into a way to be even more than I ever was, namely, to live happy and
pleased, and on his bounty I depended. What could I say to this
gentleman when he pressed me to yield to him, and argued the lawfulness
of it? But of that in its place.

I pressed him again to stay that night, and told him it was the first
completely happy night that I had ever had in the house in my life, and
I should be very sorry to have it be without his company, who was the
cause and foundation of it all; that we would be innocently merry, but
that it could never be without him; and, in short, I courted him so,
that he said he could not deny me, but he would take his horse and go
to London, do the business he had to do, which, it seems, was to pay a
foreign bill that was due that night, and would else be protested, and
that he would come back in three hours at farthest, and sup with me; but
bade me get nothing there, for since I was resolved to be merry, which
was what he desired above all things, he would send me something from
London. "And we will make it a wedding supper, my dear," says he; and
with that word took me in his arms, and kissed me so vehemently that I
made no question but he intended to do everything else that Amy had
talked of.

I started a little at the word wedding. "What do ye mean, to call it by
such a name?" says I; adding, "We will have a supper, but t'other is
impossible, as well on your side as mine." He laughed. "Well," says he,
"you shall call it what you will, but it may be the same thing, for I
shall satisfy you it is not so impossible as you make it."

"I don't understand you," said I. "Have not I a husband and you a wife?"

"Well, well," says he, "we will talk of that after supper;" so he rose
up, gave me another kiss, and took his horse for London.

This kind of discourse had fired my blood, I confess, and I knew not
what to think of it. It was plain now that he intended to lie with me,
but how he would reconcile it to a legal thing, like a marriage, that I
could not imagine. We had both of us used Amy with so much intimacy, and
trusted her with everything, having such unexampled instances of her
fidelity, that he made no scruple to kiss me and say all these things to
me before her; nor had he cared one farthing, if I would have let him
lie with me, to have had Amy there too all night. When he was gone,
"Well, Amy," says I, "what will all this come to now? I am all in a
sweat at him." "Come to, madam?" says Amy. "I see what it will come to;
I must put you to bed to-night together." "Why, you would not be so
impudent, you jade you," says I, "would you?" "Yes, I would," says she,
"with all my heart, and think you both as honest as ever you were in
your lives."

"What ails the slut to talk so?" said I. "Honest! How can it be honest?"
"Why, I'll tell you, madam," says Amy; "I sounded it as soon as I heard
him speak, and it is very true too; he calls you widow, and such indeed
you are; for, as my master has left you so many years, he is dead, to be
sure; at least he is dead to you; he is no husband. You are, and ought
to be, free to marry who you will; and his wife being gone from him, and
refusing to lie with him, then he is a single man again as much as ever;
and though you cannot bring the laws of the land to join you together,
yet, one refusing to do the office of a wife, and the other of a
husband, you may certainly take one another fairly."

"Nay, Amy," says I, "if I could take him fairly, you may be sure I'd
take him above all the men in the world; it turned the very heart within
me when I heard him say he loved me. How could it be otherwise, when you
know what a condition I was in before, despised and trampled on by all
the world? I could have took him in my arms and kissed him as freely as
he did me, if it had not been for shame."

"Ay, and all the rest too," says Amy, "at the first word. I don't see
how you can think of denying him anything. Has he not brought you out of
the devil's clutches, brought you out of the blackest misery that ever
poor lady was reduced to? Can a woman deny such a man anything?"

"Nay, I don't know what to do, Amy," says I. "I hope he won't desire
anything of that kind of me; I hope he won't attempt it. If he does, I
know not what to say to him."

"Not ask you!" says Amy. "Depend upon it, he will ask you, and you will
grant it too. I am sure my mistress is no fool. Come, pray, madam, let
me go air you a clean shift; don't let him find you in foul linen the
wedding-night."

"But that I know you to be a very honest girl, Amy," says I, "you would
make me abhor you. Why, you argue for the devil, as if you were one of
his privy councillors."

"It's no matter for that, madam, I say nothing but what I think. You own
you love this gentleman, and he has given you sufficient testimony of
his affection to you; your conditions are alike unhappy, and he is of
opinion that he may take another woman, his first wife having broke her
honour, and living from him; and that though the laws of the land will
not allow him to marry formally, yet that he may take another woman into
his arms, provided he keeps true to the other woman as a wife; nay, he
says it is usual to do so, and allowed by the custom of the place, in
several countries abroad. And, I must own, I am of the same mind; else
it is in the power of a whore, after she has jilted and abandoned her
husband, to confine him from the pleasure as well as convenience of a
woman all the days of his life, which would be very unreasonable, and,
as times go, not tolerable to all people; and the like on your side,
madam."

Had I now had my senses about me, and had my reason not been overcome by
the powerful attraction of so kind, so beneficent a friend; had I
consulted conscience and virtue, I should have repelled this Amy,
however faithful and honest to me in other things, as a viper and engine
of the devil. I ought to have remembered that neither he or I, either
by the laws of God or man, could come together upon any other terms
than that of notorious adultery. The ignorant jade's argument, that he
had brought me out of the hands of the devil, by which she meant the
devil of poverty and distress, should have been a powerful motive to me
not to plunge myself into the jaws of hell, and into the power of the
real devil, in recompense for that deliverance. I should have looked
upon all the good this man had done for me to have been the particular
work of the goodness of Heaven, and that goodness should have moved me
to a return of duty and humble obedience. I should have received the
mercy thankfully, and applied it soberly, to the praise and honour of my
Maker; whereas, by this wicked course, all the bounty and kindness of
this gentleman became a snare to me, was a mere bait to the devil's
hook; I received his kindness at the dear expense of body and soul,
mortgaging faith, religion, conscience, and modesty for (as I may call
it) a morsel of bread; or, if you will, ruined my soul from a principle
of gratitude, and gave myself up to the devil, to show myself grateful
to my benefactor. I must do the gentleman that justice as to say I
verily believe that he did nothing but what he thought was lawful; and I
must do that justice upon myself as to say I did what my own conscience
convinced me, at the very time I did it, was horribly unlawful,
scandalous, and abominable.

But poverty was my snare; dreadful poverty! The misery I had been in was
great, such as would make the heart tremble at the apprehensions of its
return; and I might appeal to any that has had any experience of the
world, whether one so entirely destitute as I was of all manner of all
helps or friends, either to support me or to assist me to support
myself, could withstand the proposal; not that I plead this as a
justification of my conduct, but that it may move the pity even of those
that abhor the crime.

Besides this, I was young, handsome, and, with all the mortifications I
had met with, was vain, and that not a little; and, as it was a new
thing, so it was a pleasant thing to be courted, caressed, embraced, and
high professions of affection made to me, by a man so agreeable and so
able to do me good.

Add to this, that if I had ventured to disoblige this gentleman, I had
no friend in the world to have recourse to; I had no prospect--no, not
of a bit of bread; I had nothing before me but to fall back into the
same misery that I had been in before.

Amy had but too much rhetoric in this cause; she represented all those
things in their proper colours; she argued them all with her utmost
skill; and at last the merry jade, when she came to dress me, "Look ye,
madam," said she, "if you won't consent, tell him you will do as Rachel
did to Jacob, when she could have no children--put her maid to bed to
him; tell him you cannot comply with him, but there's Amy, he may ask
her the question; she has promised me she won't deny you."

"And would you have me say so, Amy?" said I.

"No, madam; but I would really have you do so. Besides, you are undone
if you do not; and if my doing it would save you from being undone, as I
said before, he shall, if he will; if he asks me, I won't deny him, not
I; hang me if I do," says Amy.

"Well, I know not what to do," says I to Amy.

"Do!" says Amy. "Your choice is fair and plain. Here you may have a
handsome, charming gentleman, be rich, live pleasantly and in plenty, or
refuse him, and want a dinner, go in rags, live in tears; in short, beg
and starve. You know this is the case, madam," says Amy. "I wonder how
you can say you know not what to do."

"Well, Amy," says I, "the case is as you say, and I think verily I must
yield to him; but then," said I, moved by conscience, "don't talk any
more of your cant of its being lawful that I ought to marry again, and
that he ought to marry again, and such stuff as that; 'tis all
nonsense," says I, "Amy, there's nothing in it; let me hear no more of
that, for if I yield, 'tis in vain to mince the matter, I am a whore,
Amy; neither better nor worse, I assure you."

"I don't think so, madam, by no means," says Amy. "I wonder how you can
talk so;" and then she run on with her argument of the unreasonableness
that a woman should be obliged to live single, or a man to live single,
in such cases as before. "Well, Amy," said I, "come, let us dispute no
more, for the longer I enter into that part, the greater my scruples
will be; but if I let it alone, the necessity of my present
circumstances is such that I believe I shall yield to him, if he should
importune me much about it; but I should be glad he would not do it at
all, but leave me as I am."

"As to that, madam, you may depend," says Amy, "he expects to have you
for his bedfellow to-night. I saw it plainly in his management all day;
and at last he told you so too, as plain, I think, as he could." "Well,
well, Amy," said I, "I don't know what to say; if he will he must, I
think; I don't know how to resist such a man, that has done so much for
me." "I don't know how you should," says Amy.

Thus Amy and I canvassed the business between us; the jade prompted the
crime which I had but too much inclination to commit, that is to say,
not as a crime, for I had nothing of the vice in my constitution; my
spirits were far from being high, my blood had no fire in it to kindle
the flame of desire; but the kindness and good humour of the man and
the dread of my own circumstances concurred to bring me to the point,
and I even resolved, before he asked, to give up my virtue to him
whenever he should put it to the question.

In this I was a double offender, whatever he was, for I was resolved to
commit the crime, knowing and owning it to be a crime; he, if it was
true as he said, was fully persuaded it was lawful, and in that
persuasion he took the measures and used all the circumlocutions which I
am going to speak of.

About two hours after he was gone, came a Leadenhall basket-woman, with
a whole load of good things for the mouth (the particulars are not to
the purpose), and brought orders to get supper by eight o'clock.
However, I did not intend to begin to dress anything till I saw him; and
he gave me time enough, for he came before seven, so that Amy, who had
gotten one to help her, got everything ready in time.

We sat down to supper about eight, and were indeed very merry. Amy made
us some sport, for she was a girl of spirit and wit, and with her talk
she made us laugh very often, and yet the jade managed her wit with all
the good manners imaginable.

But to shorten the story. After supper he took me up into his chamber,
where Amy had made a good fire, and there he pulled out a great many
papers, and spread them upon a little table, and then took me by the
hand, and after kissing me very much, he entered into a discourse of his
circumstances and of mine, how they agreed in several things exactly;
for example, that I was abandoned of a husband in the prime of my youth
and vigour, and he of a wife in his middle age; how the end of marriage
was destroyed by the treatment we had either of us received, and it
would be very hard that we should be tied by the formality of the
contract where the essence of it was destroyed. I interrupted him, and
told him there was a vast difference between our circumstances, and that
in the most essential part, namely, that he was rich, and I was poor;
that he was above the world, and I infinitely below it; that his
circumstances were very easy, mine miserable, and this was an inequality
the most essential that could be imagined. "As to that, my dear," says
he, "I have taken such measures as shall make an equality still;" and
with that he showed me a contract in writing, wherein he engaged himself
to me to cohabit constantly with me, to provide for me in all respects
as a wife, and repeating in the preamble a long account of the nature
and reason of our living together, and an obligation in the penalty of
£7000 never to abandon me; and at last showed me a bond for £500, to be
paid to me, or to my assigns, within three months after his death.

He read over all these things to me, and then, in a most moving,
affectionate manner, and in words not to be answered, he said, "Now, my
dear, is this not sufficient? Can you object anything against it? If
not, as I believe you will not, then let us debate this matter no
longer." With that he pulled out a silk purse, which had threescore
guineas in it, and threw them into my lap, and concluded all the rest of
his discourse with kisses and protestations of his love, of which indeed
I had abundant proof.

Pity human frailty, you that read of a woman reduced in her youth and
prime to the utmost misery and distress, and raised again, as above, by
the unexpected and surprising bounty of a stranger; I say, pity her if
she was not able, after all these things, to make any more resistance.

However, I stood out a little longer still. I asked him how he could
expect that I could come into a proposal of such consequence the very
first time it was moved to me; and that I ought, if I consented to it,
to capitulate with him that he should never upbraid me with easiness and
consenting too soon. He said no; but, on the contrary, he would take it
as a mark of the greatest kindness I could show him. Then he went on to
give reasons why there was no occasion to use the ordinary ceremony of
delay, or to wait a reasonable time of courtship, which was only to
avoid scandal; but, as this was private, it had nothing of that nature
in it; that he had been courting me some time by the best of courtship,
viz., doing acts of kindness to me; and that he had given testimonies of
his sincere affection to me by deeds, not by flattering trifles and the
usual courtship of words, which were often found to have very little
meaning; that he took me, not as a mistress, but as his wife, and
protested it was clear to him he might lawfully do it, and that I was
perfectly at liberty, and assured me, by all that it was possible for an
honest man to say, that he would treat me as his wife as long as he
lived. In a word, he conquered all the little resistance I intended to
make; he protested he loved me above all the world, and begged I would
for once believe him; that he had never deceived me, and never would,
but would make it his study to make my life comfortable and happy, and
to make me forget the misery I had gone through. I stood still a while,
and said nothing; but seeing him eager for my answer, I smiled, and
looking up at him, "And must I, then," says I, "say yes at first asking?
Must I depend upon your promise? Why, then," said I, "upon the faith of
that promise, and in the sense of that inexpressible kindness you have
shown me, you shall be obliged, and I will be wholly yours to the end of
my life;" and with that I took his hand, which held me by the hand, and
gave it a kiss.

And thus, in gratitude for the favours I received from a man, was all
sense of religion and duty to God, all regard to virtue and honour,
given up at once, and we were to call one another man and wife, who, in
the sense of the laws both of God and our country, were no more than two
adulterers; in short, a whore and a rogue. Nor, as I have said above,
was my conscience silent in it, though it seems his was; for I sinned
with open eyes, and thereby had a double guilt upon me. As I always
said, his notions were of another kind, and he either was before of the
opinion, or argued himself into it now, that we were both free and might
lawfully marry.

But I was quite of another side--nay, and my judgment was right, but my
circumstances were my temptation; the terrors behind me looked blacker
than the terrors before me; and the dreadful argument of wanting bread,
and being run into the horrible distresses I was in before, mastered all
my resolution, and I gave myself up as above.

The rest of the evening we spent very agreeably to me; he was perfectly
good-humoured, and was at that time very merry. Then he made Amy dance
with him, and I told him I would put Amy to bed to him. Amy said, with
all her heart; she never had been a bride in her life. In short, he made
the girl so merry that, had he not been to lie with me the same night,
I believe he would have played the fool with Amy for half-an-hour, and
the girl would no more have refused him than I intended to do. Yet
before, I had always found her a very modest wench as any I ever saw in
all my life; but, in short, the mirth of that night, and a few more such
afterwards, ruined the girl's modesty for ever, as shall appear
by-and-by, in its place.

So far does fooling and toying sometimes go that I know nothing a young
woman has to be more cautious of; so far had this innocent girl gone in
jesting between her and I, and in talking that she would let him lie
with her, if he would but be kinder to me, that at last she let him lie
with her in earnest; and so empty was I now of all principle, that I
encouraged the doing it almost before my face.

I say but too justly that I was empty of principle, because, as above, I
had yielded to him, not as deluded to believe it lawful, but as overcome
by his kindness, and terrified at the fear of my own misery if he should
leave me. So with my eyes open, and with my conscience, as I may say,
awake, I sinned, knowing it to be a sin, but having no power to resist.
When this had thus made a hole in my heart, and I was come to such a
height as to transgress against the light of my own conscience, I was
then fit for any wickedness, and conscience left off speaking where it
found it could not be heard.

But to return to our story. Having consented, as above, to his proposal,
we had not much more to do. He gave me my writings, and the bond for my
maintenance during his life, and for five hundred pounds after his
death. And so far was he from abating his affection to me afterwards,
that two years after we were thus, as he called it, married, he made his
will, and gave me a thousand pounds more, and all my household stuff,
plate, &c., which was considerable too.

Amy put us to bed, and my new friend--I cannot call him husband--was so
well pleased with Amy for her fidelity and kindness to me that he paid
her all the arrear of her wages that I owed her, and gave her five
guineas over; and had it gone no farther, Amy had richly deserved what
she had, for never was a maid so true to her mistress in such dreadful
circumstances as I was in. Nor was what followed more her own fault than
mine, who led her almost into it at first, and quite into it at last;
and this may be a farther testimony what a hardness of crime I was now
arrived to, which was owing to the conviction, that was from the
beginning upon me, that I was a whore, not a wife; nor could I ever
frame my mouth to call him husband or to say "my husband" when I was
speaking of him.

We lived, surely, the most agreeable life, the grand exception only
excepted, that ever two lived together. He was the most obliging,
gentlemanly man, and the most tender of me, that ever woman gave herself
up to. Nor was there ever the least interruption to our mutual kindness,
no, not to the last day of his life. But I must bring Amy's disaster in
at once, that I may have done with her.

Amy was dressing me one morning, for now I had two maids, and Amy was my
chambermaid. "Dear madam," says Amy, "what! a'nt you with child yet?"
"No, Amy," says I; "nor any sign of it."

"Law, madam!" says Amy, "what have you been doing? Why, you have been
married a year and a half. I warrant you master would have got me with
child twice in that time." "It may be so, Amy," says I. "Let him try,
can't you?" "No," says Amy; "you'll forbid it now. Before, I told you he
should, with all my heart; but I won't now, now he's all your own."
"Oh," says I, "Amy, I'll freely give you my consent. It will be nothing
at all to me. Nay, I'll put you to bed to him myself one night or other,
if you are willing." "No, madam, no," says Amy, "not now he's yours."

"Why, you fool you," says I, "don't I tell you I'll put you to bed to
him myself?" "Nay, nay," says Amy, "if you put me to bed to him, that's
another case; I believe I shall not rise again very soon." "I'll venture
that, Amy," says I.

After supper that night, and before we were risen from table, I said to
him, Amy being by, "Hark ye, Mr. ----, do you know that you are to lie
with Amy to-night?" "No, not I," says he; but turns to Amy, "Is it so,
Amy?" says he. "No, sir," says she. "Nay, don't say no, you fool; did
not I promise to put you to bed to him?" But the girl said "No," still,
and it passed off.

At night, when we came to go to bed, Amy came into the chamber to
undress me, and her master slipped into bed first; then I began, and
told him all that Amy had said about my not being with child, and of her
being with child twice in that time. "Ay, Mrs. Amy," says he, "I believe
so too. Come hither, and, we'll try." But Amy did not go. "Go, you
fool," says I, "can't you? I freely give you both leave." But Amy would
not go. "Nay, you whore," says I, "you said, if I would put you to bed,
you would with all your heart." And with that I sat her down, pulled off
her stockings and shoes, and all her clothes piece by piece, and led her
to the bed to him. "Here," says I, "try what you can do with your maid
Amy." She pulled back a little, would not let me pull off her clothes at
first, but it was hot weather, and she had not many clothes on, and
particularly no stays on; and at last, when she saw I was in earnest,
she let me do what I would. So I fairly stripped her, and then I threw
open the bed and thrust her in.

I need say no more. This is enough to convince anybody that I did not
think him my husband, and that I had cast off all principle and all
modesty, and had effectually stifled conscience.

Amy, I dare say, began now to repent, and would fain have got out of bed
again; but he said to her, "Nay, Amy, you see your mistress has put you
to bed; 'tis all her doing; you must blame her." So he held her fast,
and the wench being naked in the bed with him, it was too late to look
back, so she lay still and let him do what he would with her.

Had I looked upon myself as a wife, you cannot suppose I would have been
willing to have let my husband lie with my maid, much less before my
face, for I stood by all the while; but as I thought myself a whore, I
cannot say but that it was something designed in my thoughts that my
maid should be a whore too, and should not reproach me with it.

Amy, however, less vicious than I, was grievously out of sorts the next
morning, and cried and took on most vehemently, that she was ruined and
undone, and there was no pacifying her; she was a whore, a slut, and she
was undone! undone! and cried almost all day. I did all I could to
pacify her. "A whore!" says I. "Well, and am not I a whore as well as
you?" "No, no," says Amy; "no, you are not, for you are married." "Not
I, Amy," says I; "I do not pretend to it. He may marry you to-morrow,
if he will, for anything I could do to hinder it. I am not married. I do
not look upon it as anything." Well, all did not pacify Amy, but she
cried two or three days about it; but it wore off by degrees.

But the case differed between Amy and her master exceedingly; for Amy
retained the same kind temper she always had; but, on the contrary, he
was quite altered, for he hated her heartily, and could, I believe, have
killed her after it, and he told me so, for he thought this a vile
action; whereas what he and I had done he was perfectly easy in, thought
it just, and esteemed me as much his wife as if we had been married from
our youth, and had neither of us known any other; nay, he loved me, I
believe, as entirely as if I had been the wife of his youth. Nay, he
told me it was true, in one sense, that he had two wives, but that I was
the wife of his affection, the other the wife of his aversion.

I was extremely concerned at the aversion he had taken to my maid Amy,
and used my utmost skill to get it altered; for though he had, indeed,
debauched the wench, I knew that I was the principal occasion of it; and
as he was the best-humoured man in the world, I never gave him over till
I prevailed with him to be easy with her, and as I was now become the
devil's agent, to make others as wicked as myself, I brought him to lie
with her again several times after that, till at last, as the poor girl
said, so it happened, and she was really with child.

She was terribly concerned at it, and so was he too. "Come, my dear,"
says I, "when Rachel put her handmaid to bed to Jacob, she took the
children as her own. Don't be uneasy; I'll take the child as my own. Had
not I a hand in the frolic of putting her to bed to you? It was my fault
as much as yours." So I called Amy, and encouraged her too, and told her
that I would take care of the child and her too, and added the same
argument to her. "For," says I, "Amy, it was all my fault. Did not I
drag your clothes off your back, and put you to bed to him?" Thus I,
that had, indeed, been the cause of all the wickedness between them,
encouraged them both, when they had any remorse about it, and rather
prompted them to go on with it than to repent it.

When Amy grew big she went to a place I had provided for her, and the
neighbours knew nothing but that Amy and I was parted. She had a fine
child indeed, a daughter, and we had it nursed; and Amy came again in
about half a year to live with her old mistress; but neither my
gentleman, or Amy either, cared for playing that game over again; for,
as he said, the jade might bring him a houseful of children to keep.

We lived as merrily and as happily after this as could be expected,
considering our circumstances; I mean as to the pretended marriage, &c.;
and as to that, my gentleman had not the least concern about him for it.
But as much as I was hardened, and that was as much as I believe ever
any wicked creature was, yet I could not help it, there was and would be
hours of intervals and of dark reflections which came involuntarily in,
and thrust in sighs into the middle of all my songs; and there would be
sometimes a heaviness of heart which intermingled itself with all my
joy, and which would often fetch a tear from my eye. And let others
pretend what they will, I believe it impossible to be otherwise with
anybody. There can be no substantial satisfaction in a life of known
wickedness; conscience will, and does often, break in upon them at
particular times, let them do what they can to prevent it.

But I am not to preach, but to relate; and whatever loose reflections
were, and how often soever those dark intervals came on, I did my utmost
to conceal them from him; ay, and to suppress and smother them too in
myself; and, to outward appearance, we lived as cheerfully and agreeably
as it was possible for any couple in the world to live.

After I had thus lived with him something above two years, truly I found
myself with child too. My gentleman was mightily pleased at it, and
nothing could be kinder than he was in the preparations he made for me,
and for my lying-in, which was, however, very private, because I cared
for as little company as possible; nor had I kept up my neighbourly
acquaintance, so that I had nobody to invite upon such an occasion.

I was brought to bed very well (of a daughter too, as well as Amy), but
the child died at about six weeks old, so all that work was to do over
again--that is to say, the charge, the expense, the travail, &c.

The next year I made him amends, and brought him a son, to his great
satisfaction. It was a charming child, and did very well. After this my
husband, as he called himself, came to me one evening, and told me he
had a very difficult thing happened to him, which he knew not what to do
in, or how to resolve about, unless I would make him easy; this was,
that his occasions required him to go over to France for about two
months.

"Well, my dear," says I, "and how shall I make you easy?"

"Why, by consenting to let me go," says he; "upon which condition, I'll
tell you the occasion of my going, that you may judge of the necessity
there is for it on my side." Then, to make me easy in his going, he told
me he would make his will before he went, which should be to my full
satisfaction.

I told him the last part was so kind that I could not decline the first
part, unless he would give me leave to add that, if it was not for
putting him to an extraordinary expense, I would go over along with him.

He was so pleased with this offer that he told me he would give me full
satisfaction for it, and accept of it too; so he took me to London with
him the next day, and there he made his will, and showed it to me, and
sealed it before proper witnesses, and then gave it to me to keep. In
this will he gave a thousand pounds to a person that we both knew very
well, in trust, to pay it, with the interest from the time of his
decease, to me or my assigns; then he willed the payment of my jointure,
as he called it, viz., his bond of five hundred pounds after his death;
also, he gave me all my household stuff, plate, &c.

This was a most engaging thing for a man to do to one under my
circumstances; and it would have been hard, as I told him, to deny him
anything, or to refuse to go with him anywhere. So we settled everything
as well as we could, left Amy in charge with the house, and for his
other business, which was in jewels, he had two men he intrusted, who he
had good security for, and who managed for him, and corresponded with
him.

Things being thus concerted, we went away to France, arrived safe at
Calais, and by easy journeys came in eight days more to Paris, where we
lodged in the house of an English merchant of his acquaintance, and was
very courteously entertained.

My gentleman's business was with some persons of the first rank, and to
whom he had sold some jewels of very good value, and received a great
sum of money in specie; and, as he told me privately, he gained three
thousand pistoles by his bargain, but would not suffer the most intimate
friend he had there to know what he had received; for it is not so safe
a thing in Paris to have a great sum of money in keeping as it might be
in London.

We made this journey much longer than we intended, and my gentleman sent
for one of his managers in London to come over to us in Paris with some
diamonds, and sent him back to London again to fetch more. Then other
business fell into his hands so unexpectedly that I began to think we
should take up our constant residence there, which I was not very averse
to, it being my native country, and I spoke the language perfectly well.
So we took a good house in Paris, and lived very well there; and I sent
for Amy to come over to me, for I lived gallantly, and my gentleman was
two or three times going to keep me a coach, but I declined it,
especially at Paris, but as they have those conveniences by the day
there, at a certain rate, I had an equipage provided for me whenever I
pleased, and I lived here in a very good figure, and might have lived
higher if I pleased.

But in the middle of all this felicity a dreadful disaster befell me,
which entirely unhinged all my affairs, and threw me back into the same
state of life that I was in before; with this one happy exception,
however, that whereas before I was poor, even to misery, now I was not
only provided for, but very rich.

My gentleman had the name in Paris for a rich man, and indeed he was so,
though not so immensely rich as people imagined; but that which was
fatal to him was, that he generally carried a shagreen case in his
pocket, especially when he went to court, or to the houses of any of the
princes of the blood, in which he had jewels of very great value.

It happened one day that, being to go to Versailles to wait upon the
Prince of ----, he came up into my chamber in the morning, and laid out
his jewel-case, because he was not going to show any jewels, but to get
a foreign bill accepted, which he had received from Amsterdam; so, when
he gave me the case, he said, "My dear, I think I need not carry this
with me, because it may be I may not come back till night, and it is too
much to venture." I returned, "Then, my dear, you shan't go." "Why?"
says he. "Because, as they are too much for you, so you are too much for
me to venture, and you shall not go, unless you will promise me not to
stay so as to come back in the night."

"I hope there's no danger," said he, "seeing that I have nothing about
me of any value; and therefore, lest I should, take that too," says he,
and gives me his gold watch and a rich diamond which he had in a ring,
and always wore on his finger.

"Well, but, my dear," says I, "you make me more uneasy now than before;
for if you apprehend no danger, why do you use this caution? and if you
apprehend there is danger, why do you go at all?"

"There is no danger," says he, "if I do not stay late, and I do not
design to do so."

"Well, but promise me, then, that you won't," says I, "or else I cannot
let you go."

"I won't indeed, my dear," says he, "unless I am obliged to it. I assure
you I do not intend it; but if I should, I am not worth robbing now, for
I have nothing about me but about six pistoles in my little purse and
that little ring," showing me a small diamond ring, worth about ten or
twelve pistoles, which he put upon his finger, in the room of the rich
one he usually wore.

[Illustration: THE JEWELLER IS ABOUT TO LEAVE FOR VERSAILLES

_And gives me his gold watch and a rich diamond which he had in a ring,
and always wore on his finger_]

I still pressed him not to stay late, and he said he would not. "But if
I am kept late," says he, "beyond my expectation, I'll stay all night,
and come next morning." This seemed a very good caution; but still my
mind was very uneasy about him, and I told him so, and entreated him
not to go. I told him I did not know what might be the reason, but that
I had a strange terror upon my mind about his going, and that if he did
go, I was persuaded some harm would attend him. He smiled, and returned,
"Well, my dear, if it should be so, you are now richly provided for; all
that I have here I give to you." And with that he takes up the casket or
case, "Here," says he, "hold your hand; there is a good estate for you
in this case; if anything happens to me 'tis all your own. I give it
you for yourself;" and with that he put the casket, the fine ring, and
his gold watch all into my hands, and the key of his scrutoire besides,
adding, "And in my scrutoire there is some money; it is all your own."

I stared at him as if I was frighted, for I thought all his face looked
like a death's-head; and then immediately I thought I perceived his head
all bloody, and then his clothes looked bloody too, and immediately it
all went off, and he looked as he really did. Immediately I fell
a-crying, and hung about him. "My dear," said I, "I am frighted to
death; you shall not go. Depend upon it some mischief will befall you."
I did not tell him how my vapourish fancy had represented him to me;
that, I thought, was not proper. Besides, he would only have laughed at
me, and would have gone away with a jest about it; but I pressed him
seriously not to go that day, or, if he did, to promise me to come home
to Paris again by daylight. He looked a little graver then than he did
before, told me he was not apprehensive of the least danger, but if
there was, he would either take care to come in the day, or, as he had
said before, would stay all night.

But all these promises came to nothing, for he was set upon in the open
day and robbed by three men on horseback, masked, as he went; and one of
them, who, it seems, rifled him while the rest stood to stop the coach,
stabbed him into the body with a sword, so that he died immediately. He
had a footman behind the coach, who they knocked down with the stock or
butt-end of a carbine. They were supposed to kill him because of the
disappointment they met with in not getting his case or casket of
diamonds, which they knew he carried about him; and this was supposed
because, after they had killed him, they made the coachman drive out of
the road a long way over the heath, till they came to a convenient
place, where they pulled him out of the coach and searched his clothes
more narrowly than they could do while he was alive. But they found
nothing but his little ring, six pistoles, and the value of about seven
livres in small moneys.

This was a dreadful blow to me, though I cannot say I was so surprised
as I should otherwise have been, for all the while he was gone my mind
was oppressed with the weight of my own thoughts, and I was as sure
that I should never see him any more that I think nothing could be like
it. The impression was so strong that I think nothing could make so deep
a wound that was imaginary; and I was so dejected and disconsolate that,
when I received the news of his disaster, there was no room for any
extraordinary alteration in me. I had cried all that day, ate nothing,
and only waited, as I might say, to receive the dismal news, which I had
brought to me about five o'clock in the afternoon.

I was in a strange country, and, though I had a pretty many
acquaintances, had but very few friends that I could consult on this
occasion. All possible inquiry was made after the rogues that had been
thus barbarous, but nothing could be heard of them; nor was it possible
that the footman could make any discovery of them by his description,
for they knocked him down immediately, so that he knew nothing of what
was done afterwards. The coachman was the only man that could say
anything, and all his account amounted to no more than this, that one of
them had soldier's clothes, but he could not remember the particulars of
his mounting, so as to know what regiment he belonged to; and as to
their faces, that he could know nothing of, because they had all of them
masks on.

I had him buried as decently as the place would permit a Protestant
stranger to be buried, and made some of the scruples and difficulties on
that account easy by the help of money to a certain person, who went
impudently to the curate of the parish of St. Sulpitius, in Paris, and
told him that the gentleman that was killed was a Catholic; that the
thieves had taken from him a cross of gold, set with diamonds, worth six
thousand livres; that his widow was a Catholic, and had sent by him
sixty crowns to the church of ----, for masses to be said for the repose
of his soul. Upon all which, though not one word was true, he was buried
with all the ceremonies of the Roman Church.

I think I almost cried myself to death for him, for I abandoned myself
to all the excesses of grief; and indeed I loved him to a degree
inexpressible; and considering what kindness he had shown me at first,
and how tenderly he had used me to the last, what could I do less?

Then the manner of his death was terrible and frightful to me, and,
above all, the strange notices I had of it. I had never pretended to the
second-sight, or anything of that kind, but certainly, if any one ever
had such a thing, I had it at this time, for I saw him as plainly in all
those terrible shapes as above; first, as a skeleton, not dead only, but
rotten and wasted; secondly, as killed, and his face bloody; and,
thirdly, his clothes bloody, and all within the space of one minute, or
indeed of a very few moments.

These things amazed me, and I was a good while as one stupid. However,
after some time I began to recover, and look into my affairs. I had the
satisfaction not to be left in distress, or in danger of poverty. On the
contrary, besides what he had put into my hands fairly in his lifetime,
which amounted to a very considerable value, I found above seven hundred
pistoles in gold in his scrutoire, of which he had given me the key; and
I found foreign bills accepted for about twelve thousand livres; so
that, in a word, I found myself possessed of almost ten thousand pounds
sterling in a very few days after the disaster.

The first thing I did upon this occasion was to send a letter to my
maid, as I still called her, Amy, wherein I gave her an account of my
disaster, how my husband, as she called him (for I never called him so),
was murdered; and as I did not know how his relations, or his wife's
friends might act upon that occasion, I ordered her to convey away all
the plate, linen, and other things of value, and to secure them in a
person's hands that I directed her to, and then to sell or dispose of
the furniture of the house, if she could, and so, without acquainting
anybody with the reason of her going, withdraw; sending notice to his
head manager at London that the house was quitted by the tenant, and
they might come and take possession of it for the executors. Amy was so
dexterous, and did her work so nimbly, that she gutted the house, and
sent the key to the said manager, almost as soon as he had notice of the
misfortune that befell their master.

Upon their receiving the surprising news of his death, the head manager
came over to Paris, and came to the house. I made no scruple of calling
myself Madame ----, the widow of Monsieur ----, the English jeweller.
And as I spoke French naturally, I did not let him know but that I was
his wife, married in France, and that I had not heard that he had any
wife in England, but pretended to be surprised, and exclaim against him
for so base an action; and that I had good friends in Poictou, where I
was born, who would take care to have justice done me in England out of
his estate.

I should have observed that, as soon as the news was public of a man
being murdered, and that he was a jeweller, fame did me the favour as to
publish presently that he was robbed of his casket of jewels, which he
always carried about him. I confirmed this, among my daily lamentations
for his disaster, and added that he had with him a fine diamond ring,
which he was known to wear frequently about him, valued at one hundred
pistoles, a gold watch, and a great quantity of diamonds of inestimable
value in his casket, which jewels he was carrying to the Prince of
----, to show some of them to him; and the prince owned that he had
spoken to him to bring some such jewels, to let him see them. But I
sorely repented this part afterward, as you shall hear.

This rumour put an end to all inquiry after his jewels, his ring, or his
watch; and as for the seven hundred pistoles, that I secured. For the
bills which were in hand, I owned I had them, but that, as I said I
brought my husband thirty thousand livres portion, I claimed the said
bills, which came to not above twelve thousand livres, for my _amende_;
and this, with the plate and the household stuff, was the principal of
all his estate which they could come at. As to the foreign bill which he
was going to Versailles to get accepted, it was really lost with him;
but his manager, who had remitted the bill to him, by way of Amsterdam,
bringing over the second bill, the money was saved, as they call it,
which would otherwise have been also gone; the thieves who robbed and
murdered him were, to be sure, afraid to send anybody to get the bill
accepted, for that would undoubtedly have discovered them.

By this time my maid Amy was arrived, and she gave me an account of her
management, and how she had secured everything, and that she had quitted
the house, and sent the key to the head manager of his business, and
let me know how much she had made of everything very punctually and
honestly.

I should have observed, in the account of his dwelling with me so long
at ----, that he never passed for anything there but a lodger in the
house; and though he was landlord, that did not alter the case. So that
at his death, Amy coming to quit the house and give them the key, there
was no affinity between that and the case of their master who was newly
killed.

I got good advice at Paris from an eminent lawyer, a counsellor of the
Parliament there, and laying my case before him, he directed me to make
a process in dower upon the estate, for making good my new fortune upon
matrimony, which accordingly I did; and, upon the whole, the manager
went back to England well satisfied that he had gotten the unaccepted
bill of exchange, which was for two thousand five hundred pounds, with
some other things, which together amounted to seventeen thousand livres;
and thus I got rid of him.

I was visited with great civility on this sad occasion of the loss of my
husband, as they thought him, by a great many ladies of quality. And the
Prince of ----, to whom it was reported he was carrying the jewels, sent
his gentleman with a very handsome compliment of condolence to me; and
his gentleman, whether with or without order, hinted as if his Highness
did intend to have visited me himself, but that some accident, which he
made a long story of, had prevented him.

By the concourse of ladies and others that thus came to visit me, I
began to be much known; and as I did not forget to set myself out with
all possible advantage, considering the dress of a widow, which in those
days was a most frightful thing; I say, as I did thus from my own
vanity, for I was not ignorant that I was very handsome; I say, on this
account I was soon made very public, and was known by the name of _La
belle veufeu de Poictou_, or the pretty widow of Poictou. As I was very
well pleased to see myself thus handsomely used in my affliction, it
soon dried up all my tears; and though I appeared as a widow, yet, as we
say in England, it was of a widow comforted. I took care to let the
ladies see that I knew how to receive them; that I was not at a loss how
to behave to any of them; and, in short, I began to be very popular
there. But I had an occasion afterwards which made me decline that kind
of management, as you shall hear presently.

About four days after I had received the compliments of condolence from
the Prince ----, the same gentleman he had sent before came to tell me
that his Highness was coming to give me a visit. I was indeed surprised
at that, and perfectly at a loss how to behave. However, as there was
no remedy, I prepared to receive him as well as I could. It was not many
minutes after but he was at the door, and came in, introduced by his own
gentleman, as above, and after by my woman Amy.

He treated me with abundance of civility, and condoled handsomely on the
loss of my husband, and likewise the manner of it. He told me he
understood he was coming to Versailles to himself, to show him some
jewels; that it was true that he had discoursed with him about jewels,
but could not imagine how any villains should hear of his coming at that
time with them; that he had not ordered him to attend with them at
Versailles, but told him that he would come to Paris by such a day, so
that he was no way accessory to the disaster. I told him gravely I knew
very well that all his Highness had said of that part was true; that
these villains knew his profession, and knew, no doubt, that he always
carried a casket of jewels about him, and that he always wore a diamond
ring on his finger worth a hundred pistoles, which report had magnified
to five hundred; and that, if he had been going to any other place, it
would have been the same thing. After this his Highness rose up to go,
and told me he had resolved, however, to make me some reparation; and
with these words put a silk purse into my hand with a hundred pistoles,
and told me he would make me a farther compliment of a small pension,
which his gentleman would inform me of.

You may be sure I behaved with a due sense of so much goodness, and
offered to kneel to kiss his hand; but he took me up and saluted me, and
sat down again (though before he made as if he was going away), making
me sit down by him.

He then began to talk with me more familiarly; told me he hoped I was
not left in bad circumstances; that Mr. ---- was reputed to be very rich,
and that he had gained lately great sums by some jewels, and he hoped,
he said, that I had still a fortune agreeable to the condition I had
lived in before.

I replied, with some tears, which, I confess, were a little forced, that
I believed, if Mr. ---- had lived, we should have been out of danger of
want, but that it was impossible to estimate the loss which I had
sustained, besides that of the life of my husband; that, by the opinion
of those that knew something of his affairs, and of what value the
jewels were which he intended to have shown to his Highness, he could
not have less about him than the value of a hundred thousand livres;
that it was a fatal blow to me, and to his whole family, especially that
they should be lost in such a manner.

His Highness returned, with an air of concern, that he was very sorry
for it; but he hoped, if I settled in Paris, I might find ways to
restore my fortune; at the same time he complimented me upon my being
very handsome, as he was pleased to call it, and that I could not fail
of admirers. I stood up and humbly thanked his Highness, but told him I
had no expectations of that kind; that I thought I should be obliged to
go over to England, to look after my husband's effects there, which, I
was told, were considerable, but that I did not know what justice a poor
stranger would get among them; and as for Paris, my fortune being so
impaired, I saw nothing before me but to go back to Poictou to my
friends, where some of my relations, I hoped, might do something for me,
and added that one of my brothers was an abbot at ----, near Poictiers.

He stood up, and taking me by the hand, led me to a large looking-glass,
which made up the pier in the front of the parlour. "Look there, madam,"
said he; "is it fit that that face" (pointing to my figure in the glass)
"should go back to Poictou? No, madam," says he; "stay and make some
gentleman of quality happy, that may, in return, make you forget all
your sorrows;" and with that he took me in his arms, and kissing me
twice, told me he would see me again, but with less ceremony.

Some little time after this, but the same day, his gentleman came to me
again, and with great ceremony and respect, delivered me a black box
tied with a scarlet riband and sealed with a noble coat-of-arms, which,
I suppose, was the prince's.

There was in it a grant from his Highness, or an assignment--I know not
which to call it--with a warrant to his banker to pay me two thousand
livres a year during my stay in Paris, as the widow of Monsieur ----,
the jeweller, mentioning the horrid murder of my late husband as the
occasion of it, as above.

I received it with great submission, and expressions of being infinitely
obliged to his master, and of my showing myself on all occasions his
Highness's most obedient servant; and after giving my most humble duty
to his Highness, with the utmost acknowledgments of the obligation, &c.,
I went to a little cabinet, and taking out some money, which made a
little sound in taking it out, offered to give him five pistoles.

He drew back, but with the greatest respect, and told me he humbly
thanked me, but that he durst not take a farthing; that his Highness
would take it so ill of him, he was sure he would never see his face
more; but that he would not fail to acquaint his Highness what respect I
had offered; and added, "I assure you, madam, you are more in the good
graces of my master, the Prince of ----, than you are aware of; and I
believe you will hear more of him."

Now I began to understand him, and resolved, if his Highness did come
again, he should see me under no disadvantages, if I could help it. I
told him, if his Highness did me the honour to see me again, I hoped he
would not let me be so surprised as I was before; that I would be glad
to have some little notice of it, and would be obliged to him if he
would procure it me. He told me he was very sure that when his Highness
intended to visit me he should be sent before to give me notice of it,
and that he would give me as much warning of it as possible.

He came several times after this on the same errand, that is, about the
settlement, the grant requiring several things yet to be done for making
it payable without going every time to the prince again for a fresh
warrant. The particulars of this part I did not understand; but as soon
as it was finished, which was above two months, the gentleman came one
afternoon, and said his Highness designed to visit me in the evening,
but desired to be admitted without ceremony.

I prepared not my rooms only, but myself; and when he came in there was
nobody appeared in the house but his gentleman and my maid Amy; and of
her I bid the gentleman acquaint his Highness that she was an
Englishwoman, that she did not understand a word of French, and that she
was one also that might be trusted.

When he came into my room, I fell down at his feet before he could come
to salute me, and with words that I had prepared, full of duty and
respect, thanked him for his bounty and goodness to a poor, desolate
woman, oppressed under the weight of so terrible a disaster; and refused
to rise till he would allow me the honour to kiss his hand.

"_Levez vous donc_," says the prince, taking me in his arms; "I design
more favours for you than this trifle;" and going on, he added, "You
shall for the future find a friend where you did not look for it, and I
resolve to let you see how kind I can be to one who is to me the most
agreeable creature on earth."

I was dressed in a kind of half mourning, had turned off my weeds, and
my head, though I had yet no ribands or lace, was so dressed as failed
not to set me out with advantage enough, for I began to understand his
meaning; and the prince professed I was the most beautiful creature on
earth. "And where have I lived," says he, "and how ill have I been
served, that I should never till now be showed the finest woman in
France!"

This was the way in all the world the most likely to break in upon my
virtue, if I had been mistress of any; for I was now become the vainest
creature upon earth, and particularly of my beauty, which as other
people admired, so I became every day more foolishly in love with myself
than before.

He said some very kind things to me after this, and sat down with me for
an hour or more, when, getting up and calling his gentleman by his name,
he threw open the door: "_Au boire_," says he; upon which his gentleman
immediately brought up a little table covered with a fine damask cloth,
the table no bigger than he could bring in his two hands, but upon it
was set two decanters, one of champagne and the other of water, six
silver plates, and a service of fine sweetmeats in fine china dishes, on
a set of rings standing up about twenty inches high, one above another.
Below was three roasted partridges and a quail. As soon as his gentleman
had set it all down, he ordered him to withdraw. "Now," says the prince,
"I intend to sup with you."

When he sent away his gentleman, I stood up and offered to wait on his
Highness while he ate; but he positively refused, and told me, "No;
to-morrow you shall be the widow of Monsieur ----, the jeweller, but
to-night you shall be my mistress; therefore sit here," says he, "and
eat with me, or I will get up and serve."

I would then have called up my woman Amy, but I thought that would not
be proper neither; so I made my excuse, that since his Highness would
not let his own servant wait, I would not presume to let my woman come
up; but if he would please to let me wait, it would be my honour to fill
his Highness's wine. But, as before, he would by no means allow me;
so we sat and ate together.

[Illustration: THE VISIT OF THE PRINCE

_And refused to rise till he would allow me the honour to kiss his
hand_]

"Now, madam," says the prince, "give me leave to lay aside my character;
let us talk together with the freedom of equals. My quality sets me at a
distance from you, and makes you ceremonious. Your beauty exalts you to
more than an equality. I must, then, treat you as lovers do their
mistresses, but I cannot speak the language; it is enough to tell you
how agreeable you are to me, how I am surprised at your beauty, and
resolve to make you happy, and to be happy with you."

I knew not what to say to him a good while, but blushed, and looking up
towards him, said I was already made happy in the favour of a person of
such rank, and had nothing to ask of his Highness but that he would
believe me infinitely obliged.

After he had eaten, he poured the sweetmeats into my lap; and the wine
being out, he called his gentleman again to take away the table, who, at
first, only took the cloth and the remains of what was to eat away; and,
laying another cloth, set the table on one side of the room with a noble
service of plate upon it, worth at least two hundred pistoles. Then,
having set the two decanters again upon the table, filled as before, he
withdrew; for I found the fellow understood his business very well, and
his lord's business too.

About half-an-hour after, the prince told me that I offered to wait a
little before, that if I would now take the trouble he would give me
leave to give him some wine; so I went to the table, filled a glass of
wine, and brought it to him on a fine salver, which the glasses stood
on, and brought the bottle or decanter for water in my other hand, to
mix as he thought fit.

He smiled, and bid me look on that salver, which I did, and admired it
much, for it was a very fine one indeed. "You may see," says he, "I
resolve to have more of your company, for my servant shall leave you
that plate for my use." I told him I believed his Highness would not
take it ill that I was not furnished fit to entertain a person of his
rank, and that I would take great care of it, and value myself
infinitely upon the honour of his Highness's visit.

It now began to grow late, and he began to take notice of it. "But,"
says he, "I cannot leave you; have you not a spare lodging for one
night?" I told him I had but a homely lodging to entertain such a guest.
He said something exceeding kind on that head, but not fit to repeat,
adding that my company would make him amends.

About midnight he sent his gentleman of an errand, after telling him
aloud that he intended to stay here all night. In a little time his
gentleman brought him a nightgown, slippers, two caps, a neckcloth, and
shirt, which he gave me to carry into his chamber, and sent his man
home; and then, turning to me, said I should do him the honour to be his
chamberlain of the household, and his dresser also. I smiled, and told
him I would do myself the honour to wait on him upon all occasions.

About one in the morning, while his gentleman was yet with him, I begged
leave to withdraw, supposing he would go to bed; but he took the hint,
and said, "I'm not going to bed yet; pray let me see you again."

I took this time to undress me, and to come in a new dress, which was,
in a manner, _une dishabille_, but so fine, and all about me so clean
and so agreeable, that he seemed surprised. "I thought," says he, "you
could not have dressed to more advantage than you had done before; but
now," says he, "you charm me a thousand times more, if that be
possible."

"It is only a loose habit, my lord," said I, "that I may the better wait
on your Highness." He pulls me to him. "You are perfectly obliging,"
says he; and, sitting on the bedside, says he, "Now you shall be a
princess, and know what it is to oblige the gratefullest man alive;" and
with that he took me in his arms.... I can go no farther in the
particulars of what passed at that time, but it ended in this, that, in
short, I lay with him all night.

I have given you the whole detail of this story to lay it down as a
black scheme of the way how unhappy women are ruined by great men; for,
though poverty and want is an irresistible temptation to the poor,
vanity and great things are as irresistible to others. To be courted by
a prince, and by a prince who was first a benefactor, then an admirer;
to be called handsome, the finest woman in France, and to be treated as
a woman fit for the bed of a prince--these are things a woman must have
no vanity in her, nay, no corruption in her, that is not overcome by it;
and my case was such that, as before, I had enough of both.

I had now no poverty attending me; on the contrary, I was mistress of
ten thousand pounds before the prince did anything for me. Had I been
mistress of my resolution, had I been less obliging, and rejected the
first attack, all had been safe; but my virtue was lost before, and the
devil, who had found the way to break in upon me by one temptation,
easily mastered me now by another; and I gave myself up to a person who,
though a man of high dignity, was yet the most tempting and obliging
that ever I met with in my life.

I had the same particular to insist upon here with the prince that I had
with my gentleman before. I hesitated much at consenting at first
asking, but the prince told me princes did not court like other men;
that they brought more powerful arguments; and he very prettily added
that they were sooner repulsed than other men, and ought to be sooner
complied with; intimating, though very genteely, that after a woman had
positively refused him once, he could not, like other men, wait with
importunities and stratagems, and laying long sieges; but as such men as
he stormed warmly, so, if repulsed, they made no second attacks; and,
indeed, it was but reasonable; for as it was below their rank to be long
battering a woman's constancy, so they ran greater hazards in being
exposed in their amours than other men did.

I took this for a satisfactory answer, and told his Highness that I had
the same thoughts in respect to the manner of his attacks; for that his
person and his arguments were irresistible; that a person of his rank
and a munificence so unbounded could not be withstood; that no virtue
was proof against him, except such as was able, too, to suffer
martyrdom; that I thought it impossible I could be overcome, but that
now I found it was impossible I should not be overcome; that so much
goodness, joined with so much greatness, would have conquered a saint;
and that I confessed he had the victory over me, by a merit infinitely
superior to the conquest he had made.

He made me a most obliging answer; told me abundance of fine things,
which still flattered my vanity, till at last I began to have pride
enough to believe him, and fancied myself a fit mistress for a prince.

As I had thus given the prince the last favour, and he had all the
freedom with me that it was possible for me to grant, so he gave me
leave to use as much freedom with him another way, and that was to have
everything of him I thought fit to command; and yet I did not ask of him
with an air of avarice, as if I was greedily making a penny of him, but
I managed him with such art that he generally anticipated my demands. He
only requested of me that I would not think of taking another house, as
I had intimated to his Highness that I intended, not thinking it good
enough to receive his visits in; but he said my house was the most
convenient that could possibly be found in all Paris for an amour,
especially for him, having a way out into three streets, and not
overlooked by any neighbours, so that he could pass and repass without
observation; for one of the back-ways opened into a narrow dark alley,
which alley was a thoroughfare or passage out of one street into
another; and any person that went in or out by the door had no more to
do but to see that there was nobody following him in the alley before he
went in at the door. This request, I knew, was reasonable, and therefore
I assured him I would not change my dwelling, seeing his Highness did
not think it too mean for me to receive him in.

He also desired me that I would not take any more servants or set up any
equipage, at least for the present; for that it would then be
immediately concluded I had been left very rich, and then I should be
thronged with the impertinence of admirers, who would be attracted by
the money, as well as by the beauty of a young widow, and he should be
frequently interrupted in his visits; or that the world would conclude I
was maintained by somebody, and would be indefatigable to find out the
person; so that he should have spies peeping at him every time he went
out or in, which it would be impossible to disappoint; and that he
should presently have it talked over all the toilets in Paris that the
Prince de ---- had got the jeweller's widow for a mistress.

This was too just to oppose, and I made no scruple to tell his Highness
that, since he had stooped so low as to make me his own, he ought to
have all the satisfaction in the world that I was all his own; that I
would take all the measures he should please to direct me to avoid the
impertinent attacks of others; and that, if he thought fit, I would be
wholly within doors, and have it given out that I was obliged to go to
England to solicit my affairs there, after my husband's misfortune, and
that I was not expected there again for at least a year or two. This he
liked very well; only he said that he would by no means have me
confined; that it would injure my health, and that I should then take a
country-house in some village, a good way off of the city, where it
should not be known who I was, and that he should be there sometimes to
divert me.

I made no scruple of the confinement, and told his Highness no place
could be a confinement where I had such a visitor, and so I put off the
country-house, which would have been to remove myself farther from him
and have less of his company; so I made the house be, as it were, shut
up. Amy, indeed, appeared, and when any of the neighbours and servants
inquired, she answered, in broken French, that I was gone to England to
look after my affairs, which presently went current through the streets
about us. For you are to note that the people of Paris, especially the
women, are the most busy and impertinent inquirers into the conduct of
their neighbours, especially that of a single woman, that are in the
world, though there are no greater intriguers in the universe than
themselves; and perhaps that may be the reason of it, for it is an old
but a sure rule, that

    "When deep intrigues are close and shy,
    The guilty are the first that spy."

Thus his Highness had the most easy, and yet the most undiscoverable,
access to me imaginable, and he seldom failed to come two or three
nights in a week, and sometimes stayed two or three nights together.
Once he told me he was resolved I should be weary of his company, and
that he would learn to know what it was to be a prisoner; so he gave out
among his servants that he was gone to ----, where he often went
a-hunting, and that he should not return under a fortnight; and that
fortnight he stayed wholly with me, and never went out of my doors.

Never woman in such a station lived a fortnight in so complete a fulness
of human delight; for to have the entire possession of one of the most
accomplished princes in the world, and of the politest, best-bred man;
to converse with him all day, and, as he professed, charm him all night,
what could be more inexpressibly pleasing, and especially to a woman of
a vast deal of pride, as I was?

To finish the felicity of this part, I must not forget that the devil
had played a new game with me, and prevailed with me to satisfy myself
with this amour, as a lawful thing; that a prince of such grandeur and
majesty, so infinitely superior to me, and one who had made such an
introduction by an unparalleled bounty, I could not resist; and,
therefore, that it was very lawful for me to do it, being at that time
perfectly single, and unengaged to any other man, as I was, most
certainly, by the unaccountable absence of my first husband, and the
murder of my gentleman who went for my second.

It cannot be doubted but that I was the easier to persuade myself of the
truth of such a doctrine as this when it was so much for my ease and for
the repose of my mind to have it be so:--

    "In things we wish, 'tis easy to deceive;
    What we would have, we willingly believe."

Besides, I had no casuists to resolve this doubt; the same devil that
put this into my head bade me go to any of the Romish clergy, and, under
the pretence of confession, state the case exactly, and I should see
they would either resolve it to be no sin at all or absolve me upon the
easiest penance. This I had a strong inclination to try, but I know not
what scruple put me off of it, for I could never bring myself to like
having to do with those priests. And though it was strange that I, who
had thus prostituted my chastity and given up all sense of virtue in two
such particular cases, living a life of open adultery, should scruple
anything, yet so it was. I argued with myself that I could not be a
cheat in anything that was esteemed sacred; that I could not be of one
opinion, and then pretend myself to be of another; nor could I go to
confession, who knew nothing of the manner of it, and should betray
myself to the priest to be a Huguenot, and then might come into
trouble; but, in short, though I was a whore, yet I was a Protestant
whore, and could not act as if I was popish, upon any account
whatsoever.

But, I say, I satisfied myself with the surprising occasion, that as it
was all irresistible, so it was all lawful; for that Heaven would not
suffer us to be punished for that which it was not possible for us to
avoid; and with these absurdities I kept conscience from giving me any
considerable disturbance in all this matter; and I was as perfectly easy
as to the lawfulness of it as if I had been married to the prince and
had had no other husband; so possible is it for us to roll ourselves up
in wickedness, till we grow invulnerable by conscience; and that
sentinel, once dozed, sleeps fast, not to be awakened while the tide of
pleasure continues to flow, or till something dark and dreadful brings
us to ourselves again.

I have, I confess, wondered at the stupidity that my intellectual part
was under all that while; what lethargic fumes dozed the soul; and how
was it possible that I, who in the case before, where the temptation was
many ways more forcible and the arguments stronger and more
irresistible, was yet under a continued inquietude on account of the
wicked life I led, could now live in the most profound tranquillity and
with an uninterrupted peace, nay, even rising up to satisfaction and
joy, and yet in a more palpable state of adultery than before; for
before, my gentleman, who called me wife, had the pretence of his wife
being parted from him, refusing to do the duty of her office as a wife
to him. As for me, my circumstances were the same; but as for the
prince, as he had a fine and extraordinary lady, or princess, of his
own, so he had had two or three mistresses more besides me, and made no
scruple of it at all.

However, I say, as to my own part, I enjoyed myself in perfect
tranquillity; and as the prince was the only deity I worshipped, so I
was really his idol; and however it was with his princess, I assure you
his other mistresses found a sensible difference, and though they could
never find me out, yet I had good intelligence that they guessed very
well that their lord had got some new favourite that robbed them of his
company, and, perhaps, of some of his usual bounty too. And now I must
mention the sacrifices he made to his idol, and they were not a few, I
assure you.

As he loved like a prince, so he rewarded like a prince; for though he
declined my making a figure, as above, he let me see that he was above
doing it for the saving the expense of it, and so he told me, and that
he would make it up in other things. First of all, he sent me a toilet,
with all the appurtenances of silver, even so much as the frame of the
table; and then for the house, he gave me the table, or sideboard of
plate, I mentioned above, with all things belonging to it of massy
silver; so that, in short, I could not for my life study to ask him for
anything of plate which I had not.

He could, then, accommodate me in nothing more but jewels and clothes,
or money for clothes. He sent his gentleman to the mercer's, and bought
me a suit, or whole piece, of the finest brocaded silk, figured with
gold, and another with silver, and another of crimson; so that I had
three suits of clothes, such as the Queen of France would not have
disdained to have worn at that time. Yet I went out nowhere; but as
those were for me to put on when I went out of mourning, I dressed
myself in them, one after another, always when his Highness came to see
me.

I had no less than five several morning dresses besides these, so that I
need never be seen twice in the same dress; to these he added several
parcels of fine linen and of lace, so much that I had no room to ask for
more, or, indeed, for so much.

I took the liberty once, in our freedoms, to tell him he was too
bountiful, and that I was too chargeable to him for a mistress, and that
I would be his faithful servant at less expense to him; and that he not
only left me no room to ask him for anything, but that he supplied me
with such a profusion of good things that I could scarce wear them, or
use them, unless I kept a great equipage, which, he knew, was no way
convenient for him or for me. He smiled, and took me in his arms, and
told me he was resolved, while I was his, I should never be able to ask
him for anything, but that he would be daily asking new favours of me.

After we were up (for this conference was in bed), he desired I would
dress me in the best suit of clothes I had. It was a day or two after
the three suits were made and brought home. I told him, if he pleased, I
would rather dress me in that suit which I knew he liked best. He asked
me how I could know which he would like best before he had seen them. I
told him I would presume for once to guess at his fancy by my own; so I
went away and dressed me in the second suit, brocaded with silver, and
returned in full dress, with a suit of lace upon my head, which would
have been worth in England two hundred pounds sterling; and I was every
way set out as well as Amy could dress me, who was a very genteel
dresser too. In this figure I came to him, out of my dressing-room,
which opened with folding-doors into his bedchamber.

He sat as one astonished a good while, looking at me, without speaking a
word, till I came quite up to him, kneeled on one knee to him, and
almost, whether he would or no, kissed his hand. He took me up, and
stood up himself, but was surprised when, taking me in his arms, he
perceived tears to run down my cheeks. "My dear," says he aloud, "what
mean these tears?" "My lord," said I, after some little check, for I
could not speak presently, "I beseech you to believe me, they are not
tears of sorrow, but tears of joy. It is impossible for me to see myself
snatched from the misery I was fallen into, and at once to be in the
arms of a prince of such goodness, such immense bounty, and be treated
in such a manner; it is not possible, my lord," said I, "to contain the
satisfaction of it; and it will break out in an excess in some measure
proportioned to your immense bounty, and to the affection which your
Highness treats me with, who am so infinitely below you."

It would look a little too much like a romance here to repeat all the
kind things he said to me on that occasion, but I can't omit one
passage. As he saw the tears drop down my cheek, he pulls out a fine
cambric handkerchief, and was going to wipe the tears off, but checked
his hand, as if he was afraid to deface something; I say, he checked his
hand, and tossed the handkerchief to me to do it myself. I took the hint
immediately, and with a kind of pleasant disdain, "How, my lord," said
I, "have you kissed me so often, and don't you know whether I am painted
or not? Pray let your Highness satisfy yourself that you have no cheats
put upon you; for once let me be vain enough to say I have not deceived
you with false colours." With this I put a handkerchief into his hand,
and taking his hand into mine, I made him wipe my face so hard that he
was unwilling to do it, for fear of hurting me.

He appeared surprised more than ever, and swore, which was the first
time that I had heard him swear from my first knowing him, that he could
not have believed there was any such skin without paint in the world.
"Well, my lord," said I, "your Highness shall have a further
demonstration than this, as to that which you are pleased to accept for
beauty, that it is the mere work of nature;" and with that I stepped to
the door and rung a little bell for my woman Amy, and bade her bring me
a cup full of hot water, which she did; and when it was come, I desired
his Highness to feel if it was warm, which he did, and I immediately
washed my face all over with it before him. This was, indeed, more than
satisfaction, that is to say, than believing, for it was an undeniable
demonstration, and he kissed my cheeks and breasts a thousand times,
with expressions of the greatest surprise imaginable.

Nor was I a very indifferent figure as to shape; though I had had two
children by my gentleman, and six by my true husband, I say I was no
despisable shape; and my prince (I must be allowed the vanity to call
him so) was taking his view of me as I walked from one end of the room
to the other. At last he leads me to the darkest part of the room, and
standing behind me, bade me hold up my head, when, putting both his
hands round my neck, as if he was spanning my neck to see how small it
was, for it was long and small, he held my neck so long and so hard in
his hand that I complained he hurt me a little. What he did it for I
knew not, nor had I the least suspicion but that he was spanning my
neck; but when I said he hurt me, he seemed to let go, and in half a
minute more led me to a pier-glass, and behold I saw my neck clasped
with a fine necklace of diamonds; whereas I felt no more what he was
doing than if he had really done nothing at all, nor did I suspect it in
the least. If I had an ounce of blood in me that did not fly up into my
face, neck, and breasts, it must be from some interruption in the
vessels. I was all on fire with the sight, and began to wonder what it
was that was coming to me.

However, to let him see that I was not unqualified to receive benefits,
I turned about: "My lord," says I, "your Highness is resolved to
conquer, by your bounty, the very gratitude of your servants; you will
leave no room for anything but thanks, and make those thanks useless
too, by their bearing no proportion to the occasion."

"I love, child," says he, "to see everything suitable. A fine gown and
petticoat, a fine laced head, a fine face and neck, and no necklace,
would not have made the object perfect. But why that blush, my dear?"
says the prince. "My lord," said I, "all your gifts call for blushes,
but, above all, I blush to receive what I am so ill able to merit, and
may become so ill also."

Thus far I am a standing mark of the weakness of great men in their
vice, that value not squandering away immense wealth upon the most
worthless creatures; or, to sum it up in a word, they raise the value of
the object which they pretend to pitch upon by their fancy; I say, raise
the value of it at their own expense; give vast presents for a ruinous
favour, which is so far from being equal to the price that nothing will
at last prove more absurd than the cost men are at to purchase their own
destruction.

I could not, in the height of all this fine doings--I say, I could not
be without some just reflection, though conscience was, as I said, dumb,
as to any disturbance it gave me in my wickedness. My vanity was fed up
to such a height that I had no room to give way to such reflections. But
I could not but sometimes look back with astonishment at the folly of
men of quality, who, immense in their bounty as in their wealth, give to
a profusion and without bounds to the most scandalous of our sex, for
granting them the liberty of abusing themselves and ruining both.

I, that knew what this carcase of mine had been but a few years before;
how overwhelmed with grief, drowned in tears, frightened with the
prospect of beggary, and surrounded with rags and fatherless children;
that was pawning and selling the rags that covered me for a dinner, and
sat on the ground despairing of help and expecting to be starved, till
my children were snatched from me to be kept by the parish; I, that was
after this a whore for bread, and, abandoning conscience and virtue,
lived with another woman's husband; I, that was despised by all my
relations, and my husband's too; I, that was left so entirely desolate,
friendless, and helpless that I knew not how to get the least help to
keep me from starving,--that I should be caressed by a prince, for the
honour of having the scandalous use of my prostituted body, common
before to his inferiors, and perhaps would not have denied one of his
footmen but a little while before, if I could have got my bread by it.

I say, I could not but reflect upon the brutality and blindness of
mankind; that because nature had given me a good skin and some agreeable
features, should suffer that beauty to be such a bait to appetite as to
do such sordid, unaccountable things to obtain the possession of it.

It is for this reason that I have so largely set down the particulars of
the caresses I was treated with by the jeweller, and also by this
prince; not to make the story an incentive to the vice, which I am now
such a sorrowful penitent for being guilty of (God forbid any should
make so vile a use of so good a design), but to draw the just picture of
a man enslaved to the rage of his vicious appetite; how he defaces the
image of God in his soul, dethrones his reason, causes conscience to
abdicate the possession, and exalts sense into the vacant throne; how he
deposes the man and exalts the brute.

Oh! could we hear the reproaches this great man afterwards loaded
himself with when he grew weary of this admired creature, and became
sick of his vice, how profitable would the report of them be to the
reader of this story! But had he himself also known the dirty history of
my actings upon the stage of life that little time I had been in the
world, how much more severe would those reproaches have been upon
himself! But I shall come to this again.

I lived in this gay sort of retirement almost three years, in which time
no amour of such a kind, sure, was ever carried up so high. The prince
knew no bounds to his munificence; he could give me nothing, either for
my wearing, or using, or eating, or drinking, more than he had done from
the beginning.

His presents were after that in gold, and very frequent and large,
often a hundred pistoles, never less than fifty at a time; and I must do
myself the justice that I seemed rather backward to receive than craving
and encroaching. Not that I had not an avaricious temper, nor was it
that I did not foresee that this was my harvest, in which I was to
gather up, and that it would not last long; but it was that really his
bounty always anticipated my expectations, and even my wishes; and he
gave me money so fast that he rather poured it in upon me than left me
room to ask it; so that, before I could spend fifty pistoles, I had
always a hundred to make it up.

After I had been near a year and a half in his arms as above, or
thereabouts, I proved with child. I did not take any notice of it to him
till I was satisfied that I was not deceived; when one morning early,
when we were in bed together, I said to him, "My lord, I doubt your
Highness never gives yourself leave to think what the case should be if
I should have the honour to be with child by you." "Why, my dear," says
he, "we are able to keep it if such a thing should happen; I hope you
are not concerned about that." "No, my lord," said I; "I should think
myself very happy if I could bring your Highness a son; I should hope to
see him a lieutenant-general of the king's armies by the interest of his
father, and by his own merit." "Assure yourself, child," says he, "if
it should be so, I will not refuse owning him for my son, though it be,
as they call it, a natural son; and shall never slight or neglect him,
for the sake of his mother." Then he began to importune me to know if it
was so, but I positively denied it so long, till at last I was able to
give him the satisfaction of knowing it himself by the motion of the
child within me.

He professed himself overjoyed at the discovery, but told me that now it
was absolutely necessary for me to quit the confinement which, he said,
I had suffered for his sake, and to take a house somewhere in the
country, in order for health as well as for privacy, against my
lying-in. This was quite out of my way; but the prince, who was a man of
pleasure, had, it seems, several retreats of this kind, which he had
made use of, I suppose, upon like occasions. And so, leaving it, as it
were, to his gentleman, he provided a very convenient house, about four
miles south of Paris, at the village of ----, where I had very agreeable
lodgings, good gardens, and all things very easy to my content. But one
thing did not please me at all, viz., that an old woman was provided,
and put into the house to furnish everything necessary to my lying-in,
and to assist at my travail.

I did not like this old woman at all; she looked so like a spy upon me,
or (as sometimes I was frighted to imagine) like one set privately to
despatch me out of the world, as might best suit with the circumstance
of my lying-in. And when his Highness came the next time to see me,
which was not many days, I expostulated a little on the subject of the
old woman; and by the management of my tongue, as well as by the
strength of reasoning, I convinced him that it would not be at all
convenient; that it would be the greater risk on his side; and at first
or last it would certainly expose him and me also. I assured him that my
servant, being an Englishwoman, never knew to that hour who his Highness
was; that I always called him the Count de Clerac, and that she knew
nothing else of him, nor ever should; that if he would give me leave to
choose proper persons for my use, it should be so ordered that not one
of them should know who he was, or perhaps ever see his face; and that,
for the reality of the child that should be born, his Highness, who had
alone been at the first of it, should, if he pleased, be present in the
room all the time, so that he would need no witnesses on that account.

This discourse fully satisfied him, so that he ordered his gentleman to
dismiss the old woman the same day; and without any difficulty I sent my
maid Amy to Calais, and thence to Dover, where she got an English
midwife and an English nurse to come over on purpose to attend an
English lady of quality, as they styled me, for four months certain.

The midwife, Amy had agreed to pay a hundred guineas to, and bear her
charges to Paris, and back again to Dover. The poor woman that was to be
my nurse had twenty pounds, and the same terms for charges as the other.

I was very easy when Amy returned, and the more because she brought with
the midwife a good motherly sort of woman, who was to be her assistant,
and would be very helpful on occasion; and bespoke a man midwife at
Paris too, if there should be any necessity for his help. Having thus
made provision for everything, the Count, for so we all called him in
public, came as often to see me as I could expect, and continued
exceeding kind, as he had always been. One day, conversing together upon
the subject of my being with child, I told him how all things were in
order, but that I had a strange apprehension that I should die with that
child. He smiled. "So all the ladies say, my dear," says he, "when they
are with child." "Well, however, my lord," said I, "it is but just that
care should be taken that what you have bestowed in your excess of
bounty upon me should not be lost;" and upon this I pulled a paper out
of my bosom, folded up, but not sealed, and I read it to him, wherein I
had left order that all the plate and jewels and fine furniture which
his Highness had given me should be restored to him by my women, and the
keys be immediately delivered to his gentleman in case of disaster.

Then I recommended my woman, Amy, to his favour for a hundred pistoles,
on condition she gave the keys up as above to his gentleman, and his
gentleman's receipt for them. When he saw this, "My dear child," said
he, and took me in his arms, "what! have you been making your will and
disposing of your effects? Pray, who do you make your universal heir?"
"So far as to do justice to your Highness, in case of mortality, I have,
my lord," said I, "and who should I dispose the valuable things to,
which I have had from your hand as pledges of your favour and
testimonies of your bounty, but to the giver of them? If the child
should live, your Highness will, I don't question, act like yourself in
that part, and I shall have the utmost satisfaction that it will be well
used by your direction."

I could see he took this very well. "I have forsaken all the ladies in
Paris," says he, "for you, and I have lived every day since I knew you
to see that you know how to merit all that a man of honour can do for
you. Be easy, child; I hope you shall not die, and all you have is your
own, to do what with it you please."

I was then within about two months of my time, and that soon wore off.
When I found my time was come, it fell out very happily that he was in
the house, and I entreated he would continue a few hours in the house,
which he agreed to. They called his Highness to come into the room, if
he pleased, as I had offered and as I desired him; and I sent word I
would make as few cries as possible to prevent disturbing him. He came
into the room once, and called to me to be of good courage, it would
soon be over, and then he withdrew again; and in about half-an-hour more
Amy carried him the news that I was delivered, and had brought him a
charming boy. He gave her ten pistoles for her news, stayed till they
had adjusted things about me, and then came into the room again, cheered
me and spoke kindly to me, and looked on the child, then withdrew, and
came again the next day to visit me.

Since this, and when I have looked back upon these things with eyes
unpossessed with crime, when the wicked part has appeared in its clearer
light and I have seen it in its own natural colours, when no more
blinded with the glittering appearances which at that time deluded me,
and as in like cases, if I may guess at others by myself, too much
possessed the mind; I say, since this I have often wondered with what
pleasure or satisfaction the prince could look upon the poor innocent
infant, which, though his own, and that he might that way have some
attachment in his affections to it, yet must always afterwards be a
remembrancer to him of his most early crime, and, which was worse, must
bear upon itself, unmerited, an eternal mark of infamy, which should be
spoken of, upon all occasions, to its reproach, from the folly of its
father and wickedness of its mother.

Great men are indeed delivered from the burthen of their natural
children, or bastards, as to their maintenance. This is the main
affliction in other cases, where there is not substance sufficient
without breaking into the fortunes of the family. In those cases either
a man's legitimate children suffer, which is very unnatural, or the
unfortunate mother of that illegitimate birth has a dreadful affliction,
either of being turned off with her child, and be left to starve, &c.,
or of seeing the poor infant packed off with a piece of money to those
she-butchers who take children off their hands, as 'tis called, that is
to say, starve them, and, in a word, murder them.

Great men, I say, are delivered from this burthen, because they are
always furnished to supply the expense of their out-of-the-way
offspring, by making little assignments upon the Bank of Lyons or the
townhouse of Paris, and settling those sums, to be received for the
maintenance of such expense as they see cause.

Thus, in the case of this child of mine, while he and I conversed, there
was no need to make any appointment as an appanage or maintenance for
the child or its nurse, for he supplied me more than sufficiently for
all those things; but afterwards, when time, and a particular
circumstance, put an end to our conversing together (as such things
always meet with a period, and generally break off abruptly), I say,
after that, I found he appointed the children a settled allowance, by an
assignment of annual rent upon the Bank of Lyons, which was sufficient
for bringing them handsomely, though privately, up in the world, and
that not in a manner unworthy of their father's blood, though I came to
be sunk and forgotten in the case; nor did the children ever know
anything of their mother to this day, other than as you may have an
account hereafter.

But to look back to the particular observation I was making, which I
hope may be of use to those who read my story, I say it was something
wonderful to me to see this person so exceedingly delighted at the birth
of this child, and so pleased with it; for he would sit and look at it,
and with an air of seriousness sometimes a great while together, and
particularly, I observed, he loved to look at it when it was asleep.

It was indeed a lovely, charming child, and had a certain vivacity in
its countenance that is far from being common to all children so young;
and he would often say to me that he believed there was something
extraordinary in the child, and he did not doubt but he would come to be
a great man.

I could never hear him say so, but though secretly it pleased me, yet it
so closely touched me another way that I could not refrain sighing, and
sometimes tears; and one time in particular it so affected me that I
could not conceal it from him; but when he saw tears run down my face,
there was no concealing the occasion from him; he was too importunate to
be denied in a thing of that moment; so I frankly answered, "It sensibly
affects me, my lord," said I, "that, whatever the merit of this little
creature may be, he must always have a bend on his arms. The disaster of
his birth will be always, not a blot only to his honour, but a bar to
his fortunes in the world. Our affection will be ever his affliction,
and his mother's crime be the son's reproach. The blot can never be
wiped out by the most glorious action; nay, if it lives to raise a
family," said I, "the infamy must descend even to its innocent
posterity."

He took the thought, and sometimes told me afterwards that it made a
deeper impression on him than he discovered to me at that time; but for
the present he put it off with telling me these things could not be
helped; that they served for a spur to the spirits of brave men,
inspired them with the principles of gallantry, and prompted them to
brave actions; that though it might be true that the mention of
illegitimacy might attend the name, yet that personal virtue placed a
man of honour above the reproach of his birth; that, as he had no share
in the offence, he would have no concern at the blot; when, having by
his own merit placed himself out of the reach of scandal, his fame
should drown the memory of his beginning; that as it was usual for men
of quality to make such little escapes, so the number of their natural
children were so great, and they generally took such good care of their
education, that some of the greatest men in the world had a bend in
their coats-of-arms, and that it was of no consequence to them,
especially when their fame began to rise upon the basis of their
acquired merit; and upon this he began to reckon up to me some of the
greatest families in France and in England also.

This carried off our discourse for a time; but I went farther with him
once, removing the discourse from the part attending our children to the
reproach which those children would be apt to throw upon us, their
originals; and when speaking a little too feelingly on the subject, he
began to receive the impression a little deeper than I wished he had
done. At last he told me I had almost acted the confessor to him; that I
might, perhaps, preach a more dangerous doctrine to him than we should
either of us like, or than I was aware of. "For, my dear," says he, "if
once we come to talk of repentance we must talk of parting."

If tears were in my eyes before, they flowed too fast now to be
restrained, and I gave him but too much satisfaction by my looks that I
had yet no reflections upon my mind strong enough to go that length, and
that I could no more think of parting than he could.

He said a great many kind things, which were great, like himself, and,
extenuating our crime, intimated to me that he could no more part with
me than I could with him; so we both, as I may say, even against our
light and against our conviction, concluded to sin on; indeed, his
affection to the child was one great tie to him, for he was extremely
fond of it.

The child lived to be a considerable man. He was first an officer of the
_Garde du Corps_ of France, and afterwards colonel of a regiment of
dragoons in Italy, and on many extraordinary occasions showed that he
was not unworthy such a father, but many ways deserving a legitimate
birth and a better mother; of which hereafter.

I think I may say now that I lived indeed like a queen; or, if you will
have me confess that my condition had still the reproach of a whore, I
may say I was, sure, the queen of whores; for no woman was ever more
valued or more caressed by a person of such quality only in the station
of a mistress. I had, indeed, one deficiency which women in such
circumstances seldom are chargeable with, namely, I craved nothing of
him, I never asked him for anything in my life, nor suffered myself to
be made use of, as is too much the custom of mistresses, to ask favours
for others. His bounty always prevented me in the first, and my strict
concealing myself in the last, which was no less to my convenience than
his.

The only favour I ever asked of him was for his gentleman, who he had
all along entrusted with the secret of our affair, and who had once so
much offended him by some omissions in his duty that he found it very
hard to make his peace. He came and laid his case before my woman Amy,
and begged her to speak to me to intercede for him, which I did, and on
my account he was received again and pardoned, for which the grateful
dog requited me by getting to bed to his benefactress, Amy, at which I
was very angry. But Amy generously acknowledged that it was her fault as
much as his; that she loved the fellow so much that she believed if he
had not asked her she should have asked him. I say, this pacified me,
and I only obtained of her that she should not let him know that I knew
it.

I might have interspersed this part of my story with a great many
pleasant parts and discourses which happened between my maid Amy and I,
but I omit them on account of my own story, which has been so
extraordinary. However, I must mention something as to Amy and her
gentleman.

I inquired of Amy upon what terms they came to be so intimate, but Amy
seemed backward to explain herself. I did not care to press her upon a
question of that nature, knowing that she might have answered my
question with a question, and have said, "Why, how did I and the prince
come to be so intimate?" So I left off farther inquiring into it, till,
after some time, she told it me all freely of her own accord, which, to
cut it short, amounted to no more than this, that, like mistress like
maid, as they had many leisure hours together below, while they waited
respectively when his lord and I were together above; I say, they could
hardly avoid the usual question one to another, namely, why might not
they do the same thing below that we did above?

On that account, indeed, as I said above, I could not find in my heart
to be angry with Amy. I was, indeed, afraid the girl would have been
with child too, but that did not happen, and so there was no hurt done;
for Amy had been hanselled before, as well as her mistress, and by the
same party too, as you have heard.

After I was up again, and my child provided with a good nurse, and,
withal, winter coming on, it was proper to think of coming to Paris
again, which I did; but as I had now a coach and horses, and some
servants to attend me, by my lord's allowance, I took the liberty to
have them come to Paris sometimes, and so to take a tour into the garden
of the Tuileries and the other pleasant places of the city. It happened
one day that my prince (if I may call him so) had a mind to give me some
diversion, and to take the air with me; but, that he might do it and not
be publicly known, he comes to me in a coach of the Count de ----, a
great officer of the court, attended by his liveries also; so that, in a
word, it was impossible to guess by the equipage who I was or who I
belonged to; also, that I might be the more effectually concealed, he
ordered me to be taken up at a mantua-maker's house, where he sometimes
came, whether upon other amours or not was no business of mine to
inquire. I knew nothing whither he intended to carry me; but when he was
in the coach with me, he told me he had ordered his servants to go to
court with me, and he would show me some of the _beau monde_. I told him
I cared not where I went while I had the honour to have him with me. So
he carried me to the fine palace of Meudon, where the Dauphin then was,
and where he had some particular intimacy with one of the Dauphin's
domestics, who procured a retreat for me in his lodgings while we
stayed there, which was three or four days.

While I was there the king happened to come thither from Versailles, and
making but a short stay, visited Madame the Dauphiness, who was then
living. The prince was here incognito, only because of his being with
me, and therefore, when he heard that the king was in the gardens, he
kept close within the lodgings; but the gentleman in whose lodgings we
were, with his lady and several others, went out to see the king, and I
had the honour to be asked to go with them.

After we had seen the king, who did not stay long in the gardens, we
walked up the broad terrace, and crossing the hall towards the great
staircase, I had a sight which confounded me at once, as I doubt not it
would have done to any woman in the world. The horse guards, or what
they call there the _gens d'armes_, had, upon some occasion, been either
upon duty or been reviewed, or something (I did not understand that
part) was the matter that occasioned their being there, I know not what;
but, walking in the guard-chamber, and with his jack-boots on, and the
whole habit of the troop, as it is worn when our horse guards are upon
duty, as they call it, at St. James's Park; I say, there, to my
inexpressible confusion, I saw Mr. ----, my first husband, the brewer.

I could not be deceived; I passed so near him that I almost brushed him
with my clothes, and looked him full in the face, but having my fan
before my face, so that he could not know me. However, I knew him
perfectly well, and I heard him speak, which was a second way of knowing
him. Besides being, you may be sure, astonished and surprised at such a
sight, I turned about after I had passed him some steps, and pretending
to ask the lady that was with me some questions, I stood as if I had
viewed the great hall, the outer guard-chamber, and some things; but I
did it to take a full view of his dress, that I might farther inform
myself.

While I stood thus amusing the lady that was with me with questions, he
walked, talking with another man of the same cloth, back again, just by
me; and to my particular satisfaction, or dissatisfaction--take it which
way you will--I heard him speak English, the other being, it seems, an
Englishman.

I then asked the lady some other questions. "Pray, madam," says I, "what
are these troopers here? Are they the king's guards?" "No," says she;
"they are the _gens d'armes_; a small detachment of them, I suppose,
attended the king to-day, but they are not his Majesty's ordinary
guard." Another lady that was with her said, "No, madam, it seems that
is not the case, for I heard them saying the _gens d'armes_ were here
to-day by special order, some of them being to march towards the Rhine,
and these attend for orders; but they go back to-morrow to Orleans,
where they are expected."

This satisfied me in part, but I found means after this to inquire whose
particular troop it was that the gentlemen that were here belonged to;
and with that I heard they would all be at Paris the week after.

Two days after this we returned for Paris, when I took occasion to speak
to my lord, that I heard the _gens d'armes_ were to be in the city the
next week, and that I should be charmed with seeing them march if they
came in a body. He was so obliging in such things that I need but just
name a thing of that kind and it was done; so he ordered his gentleman
(I should now call him Amy's gentleman) to get me a place in a certain
house, where I might see them march.

As he did not appear with me on this occasion, so I had the liberty of
taking my woman Amy with me, and stood where we were very well
accommodated for the observation which I was to make. I told Amy what I
had seen, and she was as forward to make the discovery as I was to have
her, and almost as much surprised at the thing itself. In a word, the
_gens d'armes_ entered the city, as was expected, and made a most
glorious show indeed, being new clothed and armed, and being to have
their standards blessed by the Archbishop of Paris. On this occasion
they indeed looked very gay; and as they marched very leisurely, I had
time to take as critical a view and make as nice a search among them as
I pleased. Here, in a particular rank, eminent for one monstrous-sized
man on the right; here, I say, I saw my gentleman again, and a very
handsome, jolly fellow he was, as any in the troop, though not so
monstrous large as that great one I speak of, who, it seems, was,
however, a gentleman of a good family in Gascony, and was called the
giant of Gascony.

It was a kind of a good fortune to us, among the other circumstances of
it, that something caused the troops to halt in their march a little
before that particular rank came right against that window which I stood
in, so that then we had occasion to take our full view of him at a small
distance, and so as not to doubt of his being the same person.

Amy, who thought she might, on many accounts, venture with more safety
to be particular than I could, asked her gentleman how a particular man,
who she saw there among the _gens d'armes_, might be inquired after and
found out; she having seen an Englishman riding there which was supposed
to be dead in England for several years before she came out of London
and that his wife had married again. It was a question the gentleman
did not well understand how to answer; but another person that stood by
told her, if she would tell him the gentleman's name, he would endeavour
to find him out for her, and asked jestingly if he was her lover. Amy
put that off with a laugh, but still continued her inquiry, and in such
a manner as the gentleman easily perceived she was in earnest; so he
left bantering, and asked her in what part of the troop he rode. She
foolishly told him his name, which she should not have done; and
pointing to the cornet that troop carried, which was not then quite out
of sight, she let him easily know whereabouts he rode, only she could
not name the captain. However, he gave her such directions afterwards
that, in short, Amy, who was an indefatigable girl, found him out. It
seems he had not changed his name, not supposing any inquiry would be
made after him here; but, I say, Amy found him out, and went boldly to
his quarters, asked for him, and he came out to her immediately.

I believe I was not more confounded at my first seeing him at Meudon
than he was at seeing Amy. He started and turned pale as death. Amy
believed if he had seen her at first, in any convenient place for so
villainous a purpose, he would have murdered her.

But he started, as I say above, and asked in English, with an
admiration, "What are you?" "Sir," says she, "don't you know me?"
"Yes," says he, "I knew you when you were alive; but what are you
now?--whether ghost or substance I know not." "Be not afraid, sir, of
that," says Amy; "I am the same Amy that I was in your service, and do
not speak to you now for any hurt, but that I saw you accidentally
yesterday ride among the soldiers; I thought you might be glad to hear
from your friends at London." "Well, Amy," says he then (having a little
recovered himself), "how does everybody do? What! is your mistress
here?" Thus they begun:--

_Amy._ My mistress, sir, alas! not the mistress you mean; poor
gentlewoman, you left her in a sad condition.

_Gent._ Why, that's true, Amy; but it could not be helped; I was in a
sad condition myself.

_Amy._ I believe so, indeed, sir, or else you had not gone away as you
did; for it was a very terrible condition you left them all in, that I
must say.

_Gent._ What did they do after I was gone?

_Amy._ Do, sir! Very miserably, you may be sure. How could it be
otherwise?

_Gent._ Well, that's true indeed; but you may tell me, Amy, what became
of them, if you please; for though I went so away, it was not because I
did not love them all very well, but because I could not bear to see the
poverty that was coming upon them, and which it was not in my power to
help. What could I do?

_Amy._ Nay, I believe so indeed; and I have heard my mistress say many
times she did not doubt but your affliction was as great as hers,
almost, wherever you were.

_Gent._ Why, did she believe I was alive, then?

_Amy._ Yes, sir; she always said she believed you were alive, because
she thought she should have heard something of you if you had been dead.

_Gent._ Ay, ay; my perplexity was very great indeed, or else I had never
gone away.

_Amy._ It was very cruel, though, to the poor lady, sir, my mistress;
she almost broke her heart for you at first, for fear of what might
befall you, and at last because she could not hear from you.

_Gent._ Alas, Amy! what could I do? Things were driven to the last
extremity before I went. I could have done nothing but help starve them
all if I had stayed; and, besides, I could not bear to see it.

_Amy._ You know, sir, I can say little to what passed before, but I am a
melancholy witness to the sad distresses of my poor mistress as long as
I stayed with her, and which would grieve your heart to hear them.

[Here she tells my whole story to the time that the parish took off one
of my children, and which she perceived very much affected him; and he
shook his head, and said some things very bitter when he heard of the
cruelty of his own relations to me.]

_Gent._ Well, Amy, I have heard enough so far. What did she do
afterwards?

_Amy._ I can't give you any farther account, sir; my mistress would not
let me stay with her any longer. She said she could neither pay me or
subsist me. I told her I would serve her without any wages, but I could
not live without victuals, you know; so I was forced to leave her, poor
lady, sore against my will; and I heard afterwards that the landlord
seized her goods, so she was, I suppose, turned out of doors; for as I
went by the door, about a month after, I saw the house shut up; and,
about a fortnight after that, I found there were workmen at work,
fitting it up, as I suppose, for a new tenant. But none of the
neighbours could tell me what was become of my poor mistress, only that
they said she was so poor that it was next to begging; that some of the
neighbouring gentlefolks had relieved her, or that else she must have
starved.

Then she went on, and told him that after that they never heard any more
of (me) her mistress, but that she had been seen once or twice in the
city very shabby and poor in clothes, and it was thought she worked with
her needle for her bread.

All this the jade said with so much cunning, and managed and humoured it
so well, and wiped her eyes and cried so artificially, that he took it
all as it was intended he should, and once or twice she saw tears in his
eyes too. He told her it was a moving, melancholy story, and it had
almost broke his heart at first, but that he was driven to the last
extremity, and could do nothing but stay and see them all starve, which
he could not bear the thoughts of, but should have pistolled himself if
any such thing had happened while he was there; that he left (me) his
wife all the money he had in the world but £25, which was as little as
he could take with him to seek his fortune in the world. He could not
doubt but that his relations, seeing they were all rich, would have
taken the poor children off, and not let them come to the parish; and
that his wife was young and handsome, and, he thought, might marry
again, perhaps, to her advantage, and for that very reason he never
wrote to her or let her know he was alive, that she might in a
reasonable term of years marry, and perhaps mend her fortunes; that he
resolved never to claim her, because he should rejoice to hear that she
had settled to her mind; and that he wished there had been a law made to
empower a woman to marry if her husband was not heard of in so long a
time, which time, he thought, should not be above four years, which was
long enough to send word in to a wife or family from any part of the
world.

Amy said she could say nothing to that but this, that she was satisfied
her mistress would marry nobody unless she had certain intelligence that
he had been dead from somebody that saw him buried. "But, alas!" says
Amy, "my mistress was reduced to such dismal circumstances that nobody
would be so foolish to think of her, unless it had been somebody to go
a-begging with her."

Amy then, seeing him so perfectly deluded, made a long and lamentable
outcry how she had been deluded away to marry a poor footman. "For he is
no worse or better," says she, "though he calls himself a lord's
gentleman. And here," says Amy, "he has dragged me over into a strange
country to make a beggar of me;" and then she falls a-howling again, and
snivelling, which, by the way, was all hypocrisy, but acted so to the
life as perfectly deceived him, and he gave entire credit to every word
of it.

"Why, Amy," says he, "you are very well dressed; you don't look as if
you were in danger of being a beggar." "Ay, hang 'em!" says Amy, "they
love to have fine clothes here, if they have never a smock under them.
But I love to have money in cash, rather than a chestful of fine
clothes. Besides, sir," says she, "most of the clothes I have were given
me in the last place I had, when I went away from my mistress."

Upon the whole of the discourse, Amy got out of him what condition he
was in and how he lived, upon her promise to him that if ever she came
to England, and should see her old mistress, she should not let her know
that he was alive. "Alas, sir!" says Amy, "I may never come to see
England again as long as I live; and if I should, it would be ten
thousand to one whether I shall see my old mistress, for how should I
know which way to look for her, or what part of England she may be
in?--not I," says she. "I don't so much as know how to inquire for her;
and if I should," says Amy, "ever be so happy as to see her, I would not
do her so much mischief as to tell her where you were, sir, unless she
was in a condition to help herself and you too." This farther deluded
him, and made him entirely open in his conversing with her. As to his
own circumstances, he told her she saw him in the highest preferment he
had arrived to, or was ever like to arrive to; for, having no friends or
acquaintance in France, and, which was worse, no money, he never
expected to rise; that he could have been made a lieutenant to a troop
of light horse but the week before, by the favour of an officer in the
_gens d'armes_ who was his friend, but that he must have found eight
thousand livres to have paid for it to the gentleman who possessed it,
and had leave given him to sell. "But where could I get eight thousand
livres," says he, "that have never been master of five hundred livres
ready money at a time since I came into France?"

"Oh dear, sir!" says Amy, "I am very sorry to hear you say so. I fancy
if you once got up to some preferment, you would think of my old
mistress again, and do something for her. Poor lady," says Amy, "she
wants it, to be sure;" and then she falls a-crying again. "It is a sad
thing indeed," says she, "that you should be so hard put to it for
money, when you had got a friend to recommend you, and should lose it
for want of money." "Ay, so it was, Amy, indeed," says he; "but what can
a stranger do that has neither money or friends?" Here Amy puts in again
on my account. "Well," says she, "my poor mistress has had the loss,
though she knows nothing of it. Oh dear! how happy it would have been!
To be sure, sir, you would have helped her all you could." "Ay," says
he, "Amy, so I would with all my heart; and even as I am, I would send
her some relief, if I thought she wanted it, only that then letting her
know I was alive might do her some prejudice, in case of her settling,
or marrying anybody."

"Alas," says Amy, "marry! Who will marry her in the poor condition she
is in?" And so their discourse ended for that time.

All this was mere talk on both sides, and words of course; for on
farther inquiry, Amy found that he had no such offer of a lieutenant's
commission, or anything like it; and that he rambled in his discourse
from one thing to another; but of that in its place.

You may be sure that this discourse, as Amy at first related it, was
moving to the last degree upon me, and I was once going to have sent him
the eight thousand livres to purchase the commission he had spoken of;
but as I knew his character better than anybody, I was willing to search
a little farther into it, and so I set Amy to inquire of some other of
the troop, to see what character he had, and whether there was anything
in the story of a lieutenant's commission or no.

But Amy soon came to a better understanding of him, for she presently
learnt that he had a most scoundrel character; that there was nothing of
weight in anything he said; but that he was, in short, a mere sharper,
one that would stick at nothing to get money, and that there was no
depending on anything he said; and that more especially about the
lieutenant's commission, she understood that there was nothing at all in
it, but they told her how he had often made use of that sham to borrow
money, and move gentlemen to pity him and lend him money, in hopes to
get him preferment; that he had reported that he had a wife and five
children in England, who he maintained out of his pay, and by these
shifts had run into debt in several places; and upon several complaints
for such things, he had been threatened to be turned out of the _gens
d'armes_; and that, in short, he was not to be believed in anything he
said, or trusted on any account.

Upon this information, Amy began to cool in her farther meddling with
him, and told me it was not safe for me to attempt doing him any good,
unless I resolved to put him upon suspicions and inquiries which might
be to my ruin, in the condition I was now in.

I was soon confirmed in this part of his character, for the next time
that Amy came to talk with him, he discovered himself more effectually;
for, while she had put him in hopes of procuring one to advance the
money for the lieutenant's commission for him upon easy conditions, he
by degrees dropped the discourse, then pretended it was too late, and
that he could not get it, and then descended to ask poor Amy to lend him
five hundred pistoles.

Amy pretended poverty, that her circumstances were but mean, and that
she could not raise such a sum; and this she did to try him to the
utmost. He descended to three hundred, then to one hundred, then to
fifty, and then to a pistole, which she lent him, and he, never
intending to pay it, played out of her sight as much as he could. And
thus being satisfied that he was the same worthless thing he had ever
been, I threw off all thoughts of him; whereas, had he been a man of any
sense and of any principle of honour, I had it in my thoughts to retire
to England again, send for him over, and have lived honestly with him.
But as a fool is the worst of husbands to do a woman good, so a fool is
the worst husband a woman can do good to. I would willingly have done
him good, but he was not qualified to receive it or make the best use of
it. Had I sent him ten thousand crowns instead of eight thousand livres,
and sent it with express condition that he should immediately have
bought himself the commission he talked of with part of the money, and
have sent some of it to relieve the necessities of his poor miserable
wife at London, and to prevent his children to be kept by the parish, it
was evident he would have been still but a private trooper, and his wife
and children should still have starved at London, or been kept of mere
charity, as, for aught he knew, they then were.

Seeing, therefore, no remedy, I was obliged to withdraw my hand from
him, that had been my first destroyer, and reserve the assistance that I
intended to have given him for another more desirable opportunity. All
that I had now to do was to keep myself out of his sight, which was not
very difficult for me to do, considering in what station he lived.

Amy and I had several consultations then upon the main question,
namely, how to be sure never to chop upon him again by chance, and to be
surprised into a discovery, which would have been a fatal discovery
indeed. Amy proposed that we should always take care to know where the
_gens d'armes_ were quartered, and thereby effectually avoid them; and
this was one way.

But this was not so as to be fully to my satisfaction; no ordinary way
of inquiring where the _gens d'armes_ were quartered was sufficient to
me; but I found out a fellow who was completely qualified for the work
of a spy (for France has plenty of such people). This man I employed to
be a constant and particular attendant upon his person and motions; and
he was especially employed and ordered to haunt him as a ghost, that he
should scarce let him be ever out of his sight. He performed this to a
nicety, and failed not to give me a perfect journal of all his motions
from day to day, and, whether for his pleasure or his business, was
always at his heels.

This was somewhat expensive, and such a fellow merited to be well paid,
but he did his business so exquisitely punctual that this poor man
scarce went out of the house without my knowing the way he went, the
company he kept, when he went abroad, and when he stayed at home.

By this extraordinary conduct I made myself safe, and so went out in
public or stayed at home as I found he was or was not in a possibility
of being at Paris, at Versailles, or any place I had occasion to be at.
This, though it was very chargeable, yet as I found it absolutely
necessary, so I took no thought about the expense of it, for I knew I
could not purchase my safety too dear.

By this management I found an opportunity to see what a most
insignificant, unthinking life the poor, indolent wretch, who, by his
unactive temper, had at first been my ruin, now lived; how he only rose
in the morning to go to bed at night; that, saving the necessary motion
of the troops, which he was obliged to attend, he was a mere motionless
animal, of no consequence in the world; that he seemed to be one who,
though he was indeed alive, had no manner of business in life but to
stay to be called out of it. He neither kept any company, minded any
sport, played at any game, or indeed did anything of moment; but, in
short, sauntered about like one that it was not two livres value whether
he was dead or alive; that when he was gone, would leave no remembrance
behind him that ever he was here; that if ever he did anything in the
world to be talked of, it was only to get five beggars and starve his
wife. The journal of his life, which I had constantly sent me every
week, was the least significant of anything of its kind that was ever
seen, as it had really nothing of earnest in it, so it would make no
jest to relate it. It was not important enough so much as to make the
reader merry withal, and for that reason I omit it.

Yet this nothing-doing wretch was I obliged to watch and guard against,
as against the only thing that was capable of doing me hurt in the
world. I was to shun him as we would shun a spectre, or even the devil,
if he was actually in our way; and it cost me after the rate of a
hundred and fifty livres a month, and very cheap too, to have this
creature constantly kept in view. That is to say, my spy undertook never
to let him be out of his sight an hour, but so as that he could give an
account of him, which was much the easier for to be done considering his
way of living; for he was sure that, for whole weeks together, he would
be ten hours of the day half asleep on a bench at the tavern-door where
he quartered, or drunk within the house. Though this wicked life he led
sometimes moved me to pity him, and to wonder how so well-bred,
gentlemanly a man as he once was could degenerate into such a useless
thing as he now appeared, yet at the same time it gave me most
contemptible thoughts of him, and made me often say I was a warning for
all the ladies of Europe against marrying of fools. A man of sense falls
in the world and gets up again, and a woman has some chance for herself;
but with a fool, once fall, and ever undone; once in the ditch, and die
in the ditch; once poor, and sure to starve.

But it is time to have done with him. Once I had nothing to hope for but
to see him again; now my only felicity was, if possible, never to see
him, and, above all, to keep him from seeing me, which, as above, I took
effectual care of.

I was now returned to Paris. My little son of honour, as I called him,
was left at ----, where my last country-seat then was, and I came to
Paris at the prince's request. Thither he came to me as soon as I
arrived, and told me he came to give me joy of my return, and to make
his acknowledgments for that I had given him a son. I thought, indeed,
he had been going to give me a present, and so he did the next day, but
in what he said then he only jested with me. He gave me his company all
the evening, supped with me about midnight, and did me the honour, as I
then called it, to lodge me in his arms all the night, telling me, in
jest, that the best thanks for a son born was giving the pledge for
another.

But as I hinted, so it was; the next morning he laid me down on my
toilet a purse with three hundred pistoles. I saw him lay it down, and
understood what he meant, but I took no notice of it till I came to it,
as it were, casually; then I gave a great cry out, and fell a-scolding
in my way, for he gave me all possible freedom of speech on such
occasions. I told him he was unkind, that he would never give me an
opportunity to ask for anything, and that he forced me to blush by being
too much obliged, and the like; all which I knew was very agreeable to
him, for as he was bountiful beyond measure, so he was infinitely
obliged by my being so backward to ask any favours; and I was even with
him, for I never asked him for a farthing in my life.

Upon this rallying him, he told me I had either perfectly studied the
art of humour, or else what was the greatest difficulty to others was
natural to me, adding that nothing could be more obliging to a man of
honour than not to be soliciting and craving.

I told him nothing could be craving upon him, that he left no room for
it; that I hoped he did not give merely to avoid the trouble of being
importuned. I told him he might depend upon it that I should be reduced
very low indeed before I offered to disturb him that way.

He said a man of honour ought always to know what he ought to do; and as
he did nothing but what he knew was reasonable, he gave me leave to be
free with him if I wanted anything; that he had too much value for me to
deny me anything if I asked, but that it was infinitely agreeable to
him to hear me say that what he did was to my satisfaction.

We strained compliments thus a great while, and as he had me in his arms
most part of the time, so upon all my expressions of his bounty to me he
put a stop to me with his kisses, and would admit me to go on no
farther.

I should in this place mention that this prince was not a subject of
France, though at that time he resided at Paris and was much at court,
where, I suppose, he had or expected some considerable employment. But I
mention it on this account, that a few days after this he came to me and
told me he was come to bring me not the most welcome news that ever I
heard from him in his life. I looked at him a little surprised; but he
returned, "Do not be uneasy; it is as unpleasant to me as to you, but I
come to consult with you about it and see if it cannot be made a little
easy to us both."

I seemed still more concerned and surprised. At last he said it was that
he believed he should be obliged to go into Italy, which, though
otherwise it was very agreeable to him, yet his parting with me made it
a very dull thing but to think of.

I sat mute, as one thunderstruck, for a good while; and it presently
occurred to me that I was going to lose him, which, indeed, I could but
ill bear the thoughts of; and as he told me I turned pale. "What's the
matter?" said he hastily. "I have surprised you indeed," and stepping to
the sideboard fills a dram of cordial water, which was of his own
bringing, and comes to me. "Be not surprised," said he; "I'll go nowhere
without you;" adding several other things so kind as nothing could
exceed it.

I might indeed turn pale, for I was very much surprised at first,
believing that this was, as it often happens in such cases, only a
project to drop me, and break off an amour which he had now carried on
so long; and a thousand thoughts whirled about my head in the few
moments while I was kept in suspense, for they were but a few. I say, I
was indeed surprised, and might, perhaps, look pale, but I was not in
any danger of fainting that I knew of.

However, it not a little pleased me to see him so concerned and anxious
about me, but I stopped a little when he put the cordial to my mouth,
and taking the glass in my hand, I said, "My lord, your words are
infinitely more of a cordial to me than this citron; for as nothing can
be a greater affliction than to lose you, so nothing can be a greater
satisfaction than the assurance that I shall not have that misfortune."

He made me sit down, and sat down by me, and after saying a thousand
kind things to me, he turns upon me with a smile: "Why, will you
venture yourself to Italy with me?" says he. I stopped a while, and then
answered that I wondered he would ask me that question, for I would go
anywhere in the world, or all over the world, wherever he should desire
me, and give me the felicity of his company.

Then he entered into a long account of the occasion of his journey, and
how the king had engaged him to go, and some other circumstances which
are not proper to enter into here; it being by no means proper to say
anything that might lead the reader into the least guess at the person.

But to cut short this part of the story, and the history of our journey
and stay abroad, which would almost fill up a volume of itself, I say we
spent all that evening in cheerful consultations about the manner of our
travelling, the equipage and figure he should go in, and in what manner
I should go. Several ways were proposed, but none seemed feasible, till
at last I told him I thought it would be so troublesome, so expensive,
and so public that it would be many ways inconvenient to him; and though
it was a kind of death to me to lose him, yet that, rather than so very
much perplex his affairs, I would submit to anything.

At the next visit I filled his head with the same difficulties, and then
at last came over him with a proposal that I would stay in Paris, or
where else he should direct; and when I heard of his safe arrival, would
come away by myself, and place myself as near him as I could.

This gave him no satisfaction at all, nor would he hear any more of it;
but if I durst venture myself, as he called it, such a journey, he would
not lose the satisfaction of my company; and as for the expense, that
was not to be named; neither, indeed, was there room to name it, for I
found that he travelled at the king's expense, as well for himself as
for all his equipage, being upon a piece of secret service of the last
importance.

But after several debates between ourselves, he came to this resolution,
viz., that he would travel incognito, and so he should avoid all public
notice either of himself or of who went with him; and that then he
should not only carry me with him, but have a perfect leisure of
enjoying my agreeable company (as he was pleased to call it) all the
way.

This was so obliging that nothing could be more so. Upon this foot he
immediately set to work to prepare things for his journey, and, by his
directions, so did I too. But now I had a terrible difficulty upon me,
and which way to get over it I knew not; and that was, in what manner to
take care of what I had to leave behind me. I was rich, as I have said,
very rich, and what to do with it I knew not; nor who to leave in trust
I knew not. I had nobody but Amy in the world, and to travel without Amy
was very uncomfortable, or to leave all I had in the world with her,
and, if she miscarried, be ruined at once, was still a frightful
thought; for Amy might die, and whose hands things might fall into I
knew not. This gave me great uneasiness, and I knew not what to do; for
I could not mention it to the prince, lest he should see that I was
richer than he thought I was.

But the prince made all this easy to me; for in concerting measures for
our journey he started the thing himself, and asked me merrily one
evening who I would trust with all my wealth in my absence.

"My wealth, my lord," said I, "except what I owe to your goodness is but
small, but yet that little I have, I confess, causes some
thoughtfulness, because I have no acquaintance in Paris that I dare
trust with it, nor anybody but my woman to leave in the house; and how
to do without her upon the road I do not well know."

"As to the road, be not concerned," says the prince; "I'll provide you
servants to your mind; and as for your woman, if you can trust her,
leave her here, and I'll put you in a way how to secure things as well
as if you were at home." I bowed, and told him I could not be put into
better hands than his own, and that, therefore, I would govern all my
measures by his directions; so we talked no more of it that night.

The next day he sent me in a great iron chest, so large that it was as
much as six lusty fellows could get up the steps into the house; and in
this I put, indeed, all my wealth; and for my safety he ordered a good,
honest, ancient man and his wife to be in the house with her, to keep
her company, and a maid-servant and boy; so that there was a good
family, and Amy was madam, the mistress of the house.

Things being thus secured, we set out incog., as he called it; but we
had two coaches and six horses, two chaises, and about eight
men-servants on horseback, all very well armed.

Never was woman better used in this world that went upon no other
account than I did. I had three women-servants to wait on me, one
whereof was an old Madame ----, who thoroughly understood her business,
and managed everything as if she had been major-domo; so I had no
trouble. They had one coach to themselves, and the prince and I in the
other; only that sometimes, where he knew it necessary, I went into
their coach, and one particular gentleman of the retinue rode with him.

I shall say no more of the journey than that when we came to those
frightful mountains, the Alps, there was no travelling in our coaches,
so he ordered a horse-litter, but carried by mules, to be provided for
me, and himself went on horseback. The coaches went some other way back
to Lyons. Then we had coaches hired at Turin, which met us at Suza; so
that we were accommodated again, and went by easy journeys afterwards to
Rome, where his business, whatever it was, called him to stay some time,
and from thence to Venice.

He was as good as his word, indeed; for I had the pleasure of his
company, and, in a word, engrossed his conversation almost all the way.
He took delight in showing me everything that was to be seen, and
particularly in telling me something of the history of everything he
showed me.

What valuable pains were here thrown away upon one who he was sure, at
last, to abandon with regret! How below himself did a man of quality and
of a thousand accomplishments behave in all this! It is one of my
reasons for entering into this part, which otherwise would not be worth
relating. Had I been a daughter or a wife, of whom it might be said that
he had a just concern in their instruction or improvement, it had been
an admirable step; but all this to a whore; to one who he carried with
him upon no account that could be rationally agreeable, and none but to
gratify the meanest of human frailties--this was the wonder of it. But
such is the power of a vicious inclination. Whoring was, in a word, his
darling crime, the worst excursion he made, for he was otherwise one of
the most excellent persons in the world. No passions, no furious
excursions, no ostentatious pride; the most humble, courteous, affable
person in the world. Not an oath, not an indecent word, or the least
blemish in behaviour was to be seen in all his conversation, except as
before excepted; and it has given me occasion for many dark reflections
since, to look back and think that I should be the snare of such a
person's life; that I should influence him to so much wickedness, and
that I should be the instrument in the hand of the devil to do him so
much prejudice.

We were near two years upon this grand tour, as it may be called, during
most of which I resided at Rome or at Venice, having only been twice at
Florence and once at Naples. I made some very diverting and useful
observations in all these places, and particularly of the conduct of the
ladies; for I had opportunity to converse very much among them, by the
help of the old witch that travelled with us. She had been at Naples and
at Venice, and had lived in the former several years, where, as I found,
she had lived but a loose life, as indeed the women of Naples generally
do; and, in short, I found she was fully acquainted with all the
intriguing arts of that part of the world.

Here my lord bought me a little female Turkish slave, who, being taken
at sea by a Maltese man-of-war, was brought in there, and of her I
learnt the Turkish language, their way of dressing and dancing, and some
Turkish, or rather Moorish, songs, of which I made use to my advantage
on an extraordinary occasion some years after, as you shall hear in its
place. I need not say I learnt Italian too, for I got pretty well
mistress of that before I had been there a year; and as I had leisure
enough and loved the language, I read all the Italian books I could come
at.

I began to be so in love with Italy, especially with Naples and Venice,
that I could have been very well satisfied to have sent for Amy and have
taken up my residence there for life.

As to Rome, I did not like it at all. The swarms of ecclesiastics of all
kinds on one side, and the scoundrel rabbles of the common people on the
other, make Rome the unpleasantest place in the world to live in. The
innumerable number of valets, lackeys, and other servants is such that
they used to say that there are very few of the common people in Rome
but what have been footmen, or porters, or grooms to cardinals or
foreign ambassadors. In a word, they have an air of sharping and
cozening, quarrelling and scolding, upon their general behaviour; and
when I was there the footmen made such a broil between two great
families in Rome, about which of their coaches (the ladies being in the
coaches on either side) should give way to the other, that there was
about thirty people wounded on both sides, five or six killed outside,
and both the ladies frighted almost to death.

But I have no mind to write the history of my travels on this side of
the world, at least not now; it would be too full of variety.

I must not, however, omit that the prince continued in all this journey
the most kind, obliging person to me in the world, and so constant that,
though we were in a country where it is well known all manner of
liberties are taken, I am yet well assured he neither took the liberty
he knew he might have, or so much as desired it.

I have often thought of this noble person on that account. Had he been
but half so true, so faithful and constant, to the best lady in the
world--I mean his princess--how glorious a virtue had it been in him!
And how free had he been from those just reflections which touched him
in her behalf when it was too late!

We had some very agreeable conversations upon this subject, and once he
told me, with a kind of more than ordinary concern upon his thoughts,
that he was greatly beholden to me for taking this hazardous and
difficult journey, for that I had kept him honest. I looked up in his
face, and coloured as red as fire. "Well, well," says he, "do not let
that surprise you, I do say you have kept me honest." "My lord," said I,
"'tis not for me to explain your words, but I wish I could turn them my
own way. I hope," says I, "and believe we are both as honest as we can
be in our circumstances." "Ay, ay," says he; "and honester than I doubt
I should have been if you had not been with me. I cannot say but if you
had not been here I should have wandered among the gay world here, in
Naples, and in Venice too, for 'tis not such a crime here as 'tis in
other places. But I protest," says he, "I have not touched a woman in
Italy but yourself; and more than that, I have not so much as had any
desire to it. So that, I say, you have kept me honest."

I was silent, and was glad that he interrupted me, or kept me from
speaking, with kissing me, for really I knew not what to say. I was once
going to say that if his lady, the princess, had been with him, she
would doubtless have had the same influence upon his virtue, with
infinitely more advantage to him; but I considered this might give him
offence; and, besides, such things might have been dangerous to the
circumstance I stood in, so it passed off. But I must confess I saw that
he was quite another man as to women than I understood he had always
been before, and it was a particular satisfaction to me that I was
thereby convinced that what he said was true, and that he was, as I may
say, all my own.

I was with child again in this journey, and lay in at Venice, but was
not so happy as before. I brought him another son, and a very fine boy
it was, but it lived not above two months; nor, after the first touches
of affection (which are usual, I believe, to all mothers) were over, was
I sorry the child did not live, the necessary difficulties attending it
in our travelling being considered.

After these several perambulations, my lord told me his business began
to close, and we would think of returning to France, which I was very
glad of, but principally on account of my treasure I had there, which,
as you have heard, was very considerable. It is true I had letters very
frequently from my maid Amy, with accounts that everything was very
safe, and that was very much to my satisfaction. However, as the
prince's negotiations were at an end, and he was obliged to return, I
was very glad to go; so we returned from Venice to Turin, and in the way
I saw the famous city of Milan. From Turin we went over the mountains
again, as before, and our coaches met us at Pont à Voisin, between
Chambery and Lyons; and so, by easy journeys, we arrived safely at
Paris, having been absent two years, wanting about eleven days, as
above.

I found the little family we left just as we left them, and Amy cried
for joy when she saw me, and I almost did the same.

The prince took his leave of me the night before, for, as he told me, he
knew he should be met upon the road by several persons of quality, and
perhaps by the princess herself; so we lay at two different inns that
night, lest some should come quite to the place, as indeed it happened.

After this I saw him not for above twenty days, being taken up in his
family, and also with business; but he sent me his gentleman to tell me
the reason of it, and bid me not be uneasy, and that satisfied me
effectually.

In all this affluence of my good fortune I did not forget that I had
been rich and poor once already alternately, and that I ought to know
that the circumstances I was now in were not to be expected to last
always; that I had one child, and expected another; and if I had bred
often, it would something impair me in the great article that supported
my interest--I mean, what he called beauty; that as that declined, I
might expect the fire would abate, and the warmth with which I was now
so caressed would cool, and in time, like the other mistresses of great
men, I might be dropped again; and that therefore it was my business to
take care that I should fall as softly as I could.

I say, I did not forget, therefore, to make as good provision for
myself as if I had had nothing to have subsisted on but what I now
gained; whereas I had not less than ten thousand pounds, as I said
above, which I had amassed, or secured rather, out of the ruins of my
faithful friend the jeweller, and which he, little thinking of what was
so near him when he went out, told me, though in a kind of a jest, was
all my own, if he was knocked on the head, and which, upon that title, I
took care to preserve.

My greatest difficulty now was how to secure my wealth and to keep what
I had got; for I had greatly added to this wealth by the generous bounty
of the Prince ----, and the more by the private, retired mode of living,
which he rather desired for privacy than parsimony; for he supplied me
for a more magnificent way of life than I desired, if it had been
proper.

I shall cut short the history of this prosperous wickedness with telling
you I brought him a third son, within little more than eleven months
after our return from Italy; that now I lived a little more openly, and
went by a particular name which he gave me abroad, but which I must
omit, viz., the Countess de ----; and had coaches and servants, suitable
to the quality he had given me the appearance of; and, which is more
than usually happens in such cases, this held eight years from the
beginning, during which time, as I had been very faithful to him, so I
must say, as above, that I believe he was so separated to me, that
whereas he usually had two or three women, which he kept privately, he
had not in all that time meddled with any of them, but that I had so
perfectly engrossed him that he dropped them all. Not, perhaps, that he
saved much by it, for I was a very chargeable mistress to him, that I
must acknowledge, but it was all owing to his particular affection to
me, not to my extravagance, for, as I said, he never gave me leave to
ask him for anything, but poured in his favours and presents faster than
I expected, and so fast as I could not have the assurance to make the
least mention of desiring more. Nor do I speak this of my own guess, I
mean about his constancy to me and his quitting all other women; but the
old harridan, as I may call her, whom he made the guide of our
travelling, and who was a strange old creature, told me a thousand
stories of his gallantry, as she called it, and how, as he had no less
than three mistresses at one time, and, as I found, all of her
procuring, he had of a sudden dropped them all, and that he was entirely
lost to both her and them; that they did believe he had fallen into some
new hands, but she could never hear who, or where, till he sent for her
to go this journey; and then the old hag complimented me upon his
choice; that she did not wonder I had so engrossed him; so much beauty,
&c.; and there she stopped.

Upon the whole, I found by her what was, you may be sure, to my
particular satisfaction, viz., that, as above, I had him all my own. But
the highest tide has its ebb; and in all things of this kind there is a
reflux which sometimes, also, is more impetuously violent than the first
aggression. My prince was a man of a vast fortune, though no sovereign,
and therefore there was no probability that the expense of keeping a
mistress could be injurious to him, as to his estate. He had also
several employments, both out of France as well as in it; for, as above,
I say he was not a subject of France, though he lived in that court. He
had a princess, a wife with whom he had lived several years, and a woman
(so the voice of fame reported) the most valuable of her sex, of birth
equal to him, if not superior, and of fortune proportionable; but in
beauty, wit, and a thousand good qualities superior, not to most women,
but even to all her sex; and as to her virtue, the character which was
justly her due was that of, not only the best of princesses, but even
the best of women.

They lived in the utmost harmony, as with such a princess it was
impossible to be otherwise. But yet the princess was not insensible that
her lord had his foibles, that he did make some excursions, and
particularly that he had one favourite mistress, which sometimes
engrossed him more than she (the princess) could wish, or be easily
satisfied with. However, she was so good, so generous, so truly kind a
wife, that she never gave him any uneasiness on this account; except so
much as must arise from his sense of her bearing the affront of it with
such patience, and such a profound respect for him as was in itself
enough to have reformed him, and did sometimes shock his generous mind,
so as to keep him at home, as I may call it, a great while together. And
it was not long before I not only perceived it by his absence, but
really got a knowledge of the reason of it, and once or twice he even
acknowledged it to me.

It was a point that lay not in me to manage. I made a kind of motion
once or twice to him to leave me, and keep himself to her, as he ought
by the laws and rites of matrimony to do, and argued the generosity of
the princess to him, to persuade him; but I was a hypocrite, for had I
prevailed with him really to be honest, I had lost him, which I could
not bear the thoughts of; and he might easily see I was not in earnest.
One time in particular, when I took upon me to talk at this rate, I
found, when I argued so much for the virtue and honour, the birth, and,
above all, the generous usage he found in the person of the princess
with respect to his private amours, and how it should prevail upon him,
&c., I found it began to affect him, and he returned, "And do you
indeed," says he, "persuade me to leave you? Would you have me think
you sincere?" I looked up in his face, smiling. "Not for any other
favourite, my lord," says I; "that would break my heart; but for madam
the princess!" said I; and then I could say no more. Tears followed, and
I sat silent a while. "Well," said he, "if ever I do leave you, it shall
be on the virtuous account; it shall be for the princess; I assure you
it shall be for no other woman." "That's enough, my lord," said I;
"there I ought to submit; and while I am assured it shall be for no
other mistress, I promise your Highness I will not repine; or that, if I
do, it shall be a silent grief; it shall not interrupt your felicity."

All this while I said I knew not what, and said what I was no more able
to do than he was able to leave me; which, at that time, he owned he
could not do--no, not for the princess herself.

But another turn of affairs determined this matter, for the princess was
taken very ill, and, in the opinion of all her physicians, very
dangerously so. In her sickness she desired to speak with her lord, and
to take her leave of him. At this grievous parting she said so many
passionate, kind things to him, lamented that she had left him no
children (she had had three, but they were dead); hinted to him that it
was one of the chief things which gave her satisfaction in death, as to
this world, that she should leave him room to have heirs to his family,
by some princess that should supply her place; with all humility, but
with a Christian earnestness, recommended to him to do justice to such
princess, whoever it should be, from whom, to be sure, he would expect
justice; that is to say, to keep to her singly, according to the
solemnest part of the marriage covenant; humbly asked his Highness's
pardon if she had any way offended him; and appealing to Heaven, before
whose tribunal she was to appear, that she had never violated her honour
or her duty to him, and praying to Jesus and the blessed Virgin for his
Highness; and thus, with the most moving and most passionate expressions
of her affection to him, took her last leave of him, and died the next
day.

This discourse, from a princess so valuable in herself and so dear to
him, and the loss of her following so immediately after, made such deep
impressions on him that he looked back with detestation upon the former
part of his life, grew melancholy and reserved, changed his society and
much of the general conduct of his life, resolved on a life regulated
most strictly by the rules of virtue and piety, and, in a word, was
quite another man.

The first part of his reformation was a storm upon me; for, about ten
days after the princess's funeral, he sent a message to me by his
gentleman, intimating, though in very civil terms, and with a short
preamble or introduction, that he desired I would not take it ill that
he was obliged to let me know that he could see me no more. His
gentleman told me a long story of the new regulation of life his lord
had taken up; and that he had been so afflicted for the loss of his
princess that he thought it would either shorten his life or he would
retire into some religious house, to end his days in solitude.

I need not direct anybody to suppose how I received this news. I was
indeed exceedingly surprised at it, and had much ado to support myself
when the first part of it was delivered, though the gentleman delivered
his errand with great respect, and with all the regard to me that he was
able, and with a great deal of ceremony, also telling me how much he was
concerned to bring me such a message.

But when I heard the particulars of the story at large, and especially
that of the lady's discourse to the prince a little before her death, I
was fully satisfied. I knew very well he had done nothing but what any
man must do that had a true sense upon him of the justice of the
princess's discourse to him, and of the necessity there was of his
altering his course of life, if he intended to be either a Christian or
an honest man. I say, when I heard this I was perfectly easy. I confess
it was a circumstance that it might be reasonably expected should have
wrought something also upon me; I that had so much to reflect upon more
than the prince; that had now no more temptation of poverty, or of the
powerful motive which Amy used with me--namely, comply and live, deny
and starve; I say, I that had no poverty to introduce vice, but was
grown not only well supplied, but rich; and not only rich, but was very
rich; in a word, richer than I knew how to think of, for the truth of it
was, that thinking of it sometimes almost distracted me, for want of
knowing how to dispose of it, and for fear of losing it all again by
some cheat or trick, not knowing anybody that I could commit the trust
of it to.

Besides, I should add, at the close of this affair, that the prince did
not, as I may say, turn me off rudely and with disgust, but with all the
decency and goodness peculiar to himself, and that could consist with a
man reformed and struck with the sense of his having abused so good a
lady as his late princess had been. Nor did he send me away empty, but
did everything like himself; and, in particular, ordered his gentleman
to pay the rent of the house and all the expense of his two sons, and to
tell me how they were taken care of, and where, and also that I might at
all times inspect the usage they had, and if I disliked anything it
should be rectified; and having thus finished everything, he retired
into Lorraine, or somewhere that way, where he had an estate, and I
never heard of him more--I mean, not as a mistress.

Now I was at liberty to go to any part of the world, and take care of my
money myself. The first thing that I resolved to do was to go directly
to England, for there, I thought, being among my country-folks--for I
esteemed myself an Englishwoman, though I was born in France--there, I
say, I thought I could better manage things than in France; at least,
that I would be in less danger of being circumvented and deceived; but
how to get away with such a treasure as I had with me was a difficult
point, and what I was greatly at a loss about.

There was a Dutch merchant in Paris, that was a person of great
reputation for a man of substance and of honesty, but I had no manner of
acquaintance with him, nor did I know how to get acquainted with him, so
as to discover my circumstances to him; but at last I employed my maid
Amy (such I must be allowed to call her, notwithstanding what has been
said of her, because she was in the place of a maid-servant); I say, I
employed my maid Amy to go to him, and she got a recommendation to him
from somebody else, I knew not who, so that she got access to him well
enough.

But now was my case as bad as before, for when I came to him what could
I do? I had money and jewels to a vast value, and I might leave all
those with him; that I might indeed do; and so I might with several
other merchants in Paris, who would give me bills for it, payable at
London; but then I ran a hazard of my money, and I had nobody at London
to send the bills to, and so to stay till I had an account that they
were accepted; for I had not one friend in London that I could have
recourse to, so that indeed I knew not what to do.

In this case I had no remedy but that I must trust somebody, so I sent
Amy to this Dutch merchant, as I said above. He was a little surprised
when Amy came to him and talked to him of remitting a sum of about
twelve thousand pistoles to England, and began to think she came to put
some cheat upon him; but when he found that Amy was but a servant, and
that I came to him myself, the case was altered presently.

When I came to him myself, I presently saw such a plainness in his
dealing and such honesty in his countenance that I made no scruple to
tell him my whole story, viz., that I was a widow, that I had some
jewels to dispose of, and also some money which I had a mind to send to
England, and to follow there myself; but being but a woman, and having
no correspondence in London, or anywhere else, I knew not what to do,
or how to secure my effects.

He dealt very candidly with me, but advised me, when he knew my case so
particularly, to take bills upon Amsterdam, and to go that way to
England; for that I might lodge my treasure in the bank there, in the
most secure manner in the world, and that there he could recommend me to
a man who perfectly understood jewels, and would deal faithfully with me
in the disposing them.

I thanked him, but scrupled very much the travelling so far in a strange
country, and especially with such a treasure about me; that, whether
known or concealed, I did not know how to venture with it. Then he told
me he would try to dispose of them there, that is, at Paris, and convert
them into money, and so get me bills for the whole; and in a few days he
brought a Jew to me, who pretended to buy the jewels. As soon as the Jew
saw the jewels I saw my folly, and it was ten thousand to one but I had
been ruined, and perhaps put to death in as cruel a manner as possible;
and I was put in such a fright by it that I was once upon the point of
flying for my life, and leaving the jewels and money too in the hands of
the Dutchman, without any bills or anything else. The case was thus:--

As soon as the Jew saw the jewels he falls a-jabbering, in Dutch or
Portuguese, to the merchant; and I could presently perceive that they
were in some great surprise, both of them. The Jew held up his hands,
looked at me with some horror, then talked Dutch again, and put himself
into a thousand shapes, twisting his body and wringing up his face this
way and that way in his discourse, stamping with his feet, and throwing
abroad his hands, as if he was not in a rage only, but in a mere fury.
Then he would turn and give a look at me like the devil. I thought I
never saw anything so frightful in my life.

At length I put in a word. "Sir," says I to the Dutch merchant, "what is
all this discourse to my business? What is this gentleman in all these
passions about? I wish, if he is to treat with me, he would speak that I
may understand him; or if you have business of your own between you that
is to be done first, let me withdraw, and I'll come again when you are
at leisure."

"No, no, madam," says the Dutchman very kindly, "you must not go; all
our discourse is about you and your jewels, and you shall hear it
presently; it concerns you very much, I assure you." "Concern me!" says
I. "What can it concern me so much as to put this gentleman into such
agonies, and what makes him give me such devil's looks as he does? Why,
he looks as if he would devour me."

The Jew understood me presently, continuing in a kind of rage, and spoke
in French: "Yes, madam, it does concern you much, very much, very much,"
repeating the words, shaking his head; and then turning to the Dutchman,
"Sir," says he, "pray tell her what is the case." "No," says the
merchant, "not yet; let us talk a little farther of it by ourselves;"
upon which they withdrew into another room, where still they talked very
high, but in a language I did not understand. I began to be a little
surprised at what the Jew had said, you may be sure, and eager to know
what he meant, and was very impatient till the Dutch merchant came back,
and that so impatient that I called one of his servants to let him know
I desired to speak with him. When he came in I asked his pardon for
being so impatient, but told him I could not be easy till he had told me
what the meaning of all this was. "Why, madam," says the Dutch merchant,
"in short, the meaning is what I am surprised at too. This man is a Jew,
and understands jewels perfectly well, and that was the reason I sent
for him, to dispose of them to him for you; but as soon as he saw them,
he knew the jewels very distinctly, and flying out in a passion, as you
see he did, told me, in short, that they were the very parcel of jewels
which the English jeweller had about him who was robbed going to
Versailles, about eight years ago, to show them the Prince de ----, and
that it was for these very jewels that the poor gentleman was murdered;
and he is in all this agony to make me ask you how you came by them; and
he says you ought to be charged with the robbery and murder, and put to
the question to discover who were the persons that did it, that they
might be brought to justice." While he said this the Jew came impudently
back into the room without calling, which a little surprised me again.

The Dutch merchant spoke pretty good English, and he knew that the Jew
did not understand English at all, so he told me the latter part, when
he came into the room, in English, at which I smiled, which put the Jew
into his mad fit again, and shaking his head and making his devil's
faces again, he seemed to threaten me for laughing, saying, in French,
this was an affair I should have little reason to laugh at, and the
like. At this I laughed again, and flouted him, letting him see that I
scorned him, and turning to the Dutch merchant, "Sir," says I, "that
those jewels were belonging to Mr. ----, the English jeweller" (naming
his name readily), "in that," says I, "this person is right; but that I
should be questioned how I came to have them is a token of his
ignorance, which, however, he might have managed with a little more good
manners, till I told him who I am, and both he and you too will be more
easy in that part when I should tell you that I am the unhappy widow of
that Mr. ---- who was so barbarously murdered going to Versailles, and
that he was not robbed of those jewels, but of others, Mr. ---- having
left those behind him with me, lest he should be robbed. Had I, sir,
come otherwise by them, I should not have been weak enough to have
exposed them to sale here, where the thing was done, but have carried
them farther off."

This was an agreeable surprise to the Dutch merchant, who, being an
honest man himself, believed everything I said, which, indeed, being all
really and literally true, except the deficiency of my marriage, I spoke
with such an unconcerned easiness that it might plainly be seen that I
had no guilt upon me, as the Jew suggested.

The Jew was confounded when he heard that I was the jeweller's wife. But
as I had raised his passion with saying he looked at me with the devil's
face, he studied mischief in his heart, and answered, that should not
serve my turn; so called the Dutchman out again, when he told him that
he resolved to prosecute this matter farther.

There was one kind chance in this affair, which, indeed, was my
deliverance, and that was, that the fool could not restrain his passion,
but must let it fly to the Dutch merchant, to whom, when they withdrew a
second time, as above, he told that he would bring a process against me
for the murder, and that it should cost me dear for using him at that
rate; and away he went, desiring the Dutch merchant to tell him when I
would be there again. Had he suspected that the Dutchman would have
communicated the particulars to me, he would never have been so foolish
as to have mentioned that part to him.

But the malice of his thoughts anticipated him, and the Dutch merchant
was so good as to give me an account of his design, which, indeed, was
wicked enough in its nature; but to me it would have been worse than
otherwise it would to another, for, upon examination, I could not have
proved myself to be the wife of the jeweller, so the suspicion might
have been carried on with the better face; and then I should also have
brought all his relations in England upon me, who, finding by the
proceedings that I was not his wife, but a mistress, or, in English, a
whore, would immediately have laid claim to the jewels, as I had owned
them to be his.

This thought immediately rushed into my head as soon as the Dutch
merchant had told me what wicked things were in the head of that cursed
Jew; and the villain (for so I must call him) convinced the Dutch
merchant that he was in earnest by an expression which showed the rest
of his design, and that was, a plot to get the rest of the jewels into
his hand.

When first he hinted to the Dutchman that the jewels were such a man's
(meaning my husband's), he made wonderful exclamations on account of
their having been concealed so long. Where must they have lain? And what
was the woman that brought them? And that she (meaning me) ought to be
immediately apprehended and put into the hands of justice. And this was
the time that, as I said, he made such horrid gestures and looked at me
so like a devil.

The merchant, hearing him talk at that rate, and seeing him in earnest,
said to him, "Hold your tongue a little; this is a thing of consequence.
If it be so, let you and I go into the next room and consider of it
there;" and so they withdrew, and left me.

Here, as before, I was uneasy, and called him out, and, having heard how
it was, gave him that answer, that I was his wife, or widow, which the
malicious Jew said should not serve my turn. And then it was that the
Dutchman called him out again; and in this time of his withdrawing, the
merchant, finding, as above, that he was really in earnest,
counterfeited a little to be of his mind, and entered into proposals
with him for the thing itself.

In this they agreed to go to an advocate, or counsel, for directions how
to proceed, and to meet again the next day, against which time the
merchant was to appoint me to come again with the jewels, in order to
sell them. "No," says the merchant, "I will go farther with her than so;
I will desire her to leave the jewels with me, to show to another
person, in order to get the better price for them." "That's right," says
the Jew; "and I'll engage she shall never be mistress of them again;
they shall either be seized by us," says he, "in the king's name, or she
shall be glad to give them up to us to prevent her being put to the
torture."

The merchant said "Yes" to everything he offered, and they agreed to
meet the next morning about it, and I was to be persuaded to leave the
jewels with him, and come to them the next day at four o'clock in order
to make a good bargain for them; and on these conditions they parted.
But the honest Dutchman, filled with indignation at the barbarous
design, came directly to me and told me the whole story. "And now,
madam," says he, "you are to consider immediately what you have to do."

I told him, if I was sure to have justice, I would not fear all that
such a rogue could do to me; but how such things were carried on in
France I knew not. I told him the greatest difficulty would be to prove
our marriage, for that it was done in England, and in a remote part of
England too; and, which was worse, it would be hard to produce authentic
vouchers of it, because we were married in private. "But as to the death
of your husband, madam, what can be said to that?" said he. "Nay," said
I, "what can they say to it? In England," added I, "if they would offer
such an injury to any one, they must prove the fact or give just reason
for their suspicions. That my husband was murdered, that every one
knows; but that he was robbed, or of what, or how much, that none
knows--no, not myself; and why was I not questioned for it then? I have
lived in Paris ever since, lived publicly, and no man had yet the
impudence to suggest such a thing of me."

"I am fully satisfied of that," says the merchant; "but as this is a
rogue who will stick at nothing, what can we say? And who knows what he
may swear? Suppose he should swear that he knows your husband had those
particular jewels with him the morning when he went out, and that he
showed them to him to consider their value, and what price he should ask
the Prince de ---- for them?"

"Nay, by the same rule," said I, "he may swear that I murdered my
husband, if he finds it for his turn." "That's true," said he; "and if
he should, I do not see what could save you;" but added, "I have found
out his more immediate design. His design is to have you carried to the
Châtelet, that the suspicion may appear just, and then to get the jewels
out of your hands if possible; then, at last, to drop the prosecution on
your consenting to quit the jewels to him; and how you will do to avoid
this is the question which I would have you consider of."

"My misfortune, sir," said I, "is that I have no time to consider, and I
have no person to consider with or advise about it. I find that
innocence may be oppressed by such an impudent fellow as this; he that
does not value perjury has any man's life at his mercy. But, sir," said
I, "is the justice such here that, while I may be in the hands of the
public and under prosecution, he may get hold of my effects and get my
jewels into his hands?"

"I don't know," says he, "what may be done in that case; but if not he,
if the court of justice should get hold of them I do not know but you
may find it as difficult to get them out of their hands again, and, at
least, it may cost you half as much as they are worth; so I think it
would be a much better way to prevent their coming at them at all."

"But what course can I take to do that," says I, "now they have got
notice that I have them? If they get me into their hands they will
oblige me to produce them, or perhaps sentence me to prison till I do."

"Nay," says he, "as this brute says, too, put you to the question--that
is, to the torture, on pretence of making you confess who were the
murderers of your husband."

"Confess!" said I. "How can I confess what I know nothing of?"

"If they come to have you to the rack," said he, "they will make you
confess you did it yourself, whether you did it or no, and then you are
cast."

The very word rack frighted me to death almost, and I had no spirit left
in me. "Did it myself!" said I. "That's impossible!"

"No, madam," says he, "'tis far from impossible. The most innocent
people in the world have been forced to confess themselves guilty of
what they never heard of, much less had any hand in."

"What, then, must I do?" said I. "What would you advise me to?"

"Why," says he, "I would advise you to be gone. You intended to go away
in four or five days, and you may as well go in two days; and if you can
do so, I shall manage it so that he shall not suspect your being gone
for several days after." Then he told me how the rogue would have me
ordered to bring the jewels the next day for sale, and that then he
would have me apprehended; how he had made the Jew believe he would join
with him in his design, and that he (the merchant) would get the jewels
into his hands. "Now," says the merchant, "I shall give you bills for
the money you desired, immediately, and such as shall not fail of being
paid. Take your jewels with you, and go this very evening to St.
Germain-en-Laye; I'll send a man thither with you, and from thence he
shall guide you to-morrow to Rouen, where there lies a ship of mine,
just ready to sail for Rotterdam; you shall have your passage in that
ship on my account, and I will send orders for him to sail as soon as
you are on board, and a letter to my friend at Rotterdam to entertain
and take care of you."

This was too kind an offer for me, as things stood, not to be accepted,
and be thankful for; and as to going away, I had prepared everything for
parting, so that I had little to do but to go back, take two or three
boxes and bundles, and such things, and my maid Amy, and be gone.

Then the merchant told me the measures he had resolved to take to delude
the Jew while I made my escape, which was very well contrived indeed.
"First," said he, "when he comes to-morrow I shall tell him that I
proposed to you to leave the jewels with me, as we agreed, but that you
said you would come and bring them in the afternoon, so that we must
stay for you till four o'clock; but then, at that time, I will show a
letter from you, as if just come in, wherein you shall excuse your not
coming, for that some company came to visit you, and prevented you; but
that you desire me to take care that the gentleman be ready to buy your
jewels, and that you will come to-morrow at the same hour, without
fail.

"When to-morrow is come, we shall wait at the time, but you not
appearing, I shall seem most dissatisfied, and wonder what can be the
reason; and so we shall agree to go the next day to get out a process
against you. But the next day, in the morning, I'll send to give him
notice that you have been at my house, but he not being there, have made
another appointment, and that I desire to speak with him. When he comes,
I'll tell him you appear perfectly blind as to your danger, and that you
appeared much disappointed that he did not come, though you could not
meet the night before; and obliged me to have him here to-morrow at
three o'clock. When to-morrow comes," says he, "you shall send word that
you are taken so ill that you cannot come out for that day, but that you
will not fail the next day; and the next day you shall neither come or
send, nor let us ever hear any more of you; for by that time you shall
be in Holland, if you please."

I could not but approve all his measures, seeing they were so well
contrived, and in so friendly a manner, for my benefit; and as he seemed
to be so very sincere, I resolved to put my life in his hands.
Immediately I went to my lodgings, and sent away Amy with such bundles
as I had prepared for my travelling. I also sent several parcels of my
fine furniture to the merchant's house to be laid up for me, and
bringing the key of the lodgings with me, I came back to his house. Here
we finished our matters of money, and I delivered into his hands seven
thousand eight hundred pistoles in bills and money, a copy of an
assignment on the townhouse of Paris for four thousand pistoles, at
three per cent. interest, attested, and a procuration for receiving the
interest half-yearly; but the original I kept myself.

I could have trusted all I had with him, for he was perfectly honest,
and had not the least view of doing me any wrong. Indeed, after it was
so apparent that he had, as it were, saved my life, or at least saved me
from being exposed and ruined--I say, after this, how could I doubt him
in anything?

When I came to him, he had everything ready as I wanted, and as he had
proposed. As to my money, he gave me first of all an accepted bill,
payable at Rotterdam, for four thousand pistoles, and drawn from Genoa
upon a merchant at Rotterdam, payable to a merchant at Paris, and
endorsed by him to my merchant; this, he assured me, would be punctually
paid; and so it was, to a day. The rest I had in other bills of
exchange, drawn by himself upon other merchants in Holland. Having
secured my jewels too, as well as I could, he sent me away the same
evening in a friend's coach, which he had procured for me, to St.
Germain, and the next morning to Rouen. He also sent a servant of his
own on horseback with me, who provided everything for me, and who
carried his orders to the captain of the ship, which lay about three
miles below Rouen, in the river, and by his directions I went
immediately on board. The third day after I was on board the ship went
away, and we were out at sea the next day after that; and thus I took my
leave of France, and got clear of an ugly business, which, had it gone
on, might have ruined me, and sent me back as naked to England as I was
a little before I left it.

And now Amy and I were at leisure to look upon the mischiefs that we had
escaped; and had I had any religion or any sense of a Supreme Power,
managing, directing, and governing in both causes and events in this
world, such a case as this would have given anybody room to have been
very thankful to the Power who had not only put such a treasure into my
hand, but given me such an escape from the ruin that threatened me; but
I had none of those things about me. I had, indeed, a grateful sense
upon my mind of the generous friendship of my deliverer, the Dutch
merchant, by whom I was so faithfully served, and by whom, as far as
relates to second causes, I was preserved from destruction.

I say, I had a grateful sense upon my mind of his kindness and
faithfulness to me, and I resolved to show him some testimony of it as
soon as I came to the end of my rambles, for I was yet but in a state of
uncertainty, and sometimes that gave me a little uneasiness too. I had
paper indeed for my money, and he had showed himself very good to me in
conveying me away, as above; but I had not seen the end of things yet,
for unless the bills were paid, I might still be a great loser by my
Dutchman, and he might, perhaps, have contrived all that affair of the
Jew to put me into a fright and get me to run away, and that as if it
were to save my life; that if the bills should be refused, I was cheated
with a witness, and the like. But these were but surmises, and, indeed,
were perfectly without cause, for the honest man acted as honest men
always do, with an upright and disinterested principle, and with a
sincerity not often to be found in the world. What gain he made by the
exchange was just, and was nothing but what was his due, and was in the
way of his business; but otherwise he made no advantage of me at all.

When I passed in the ship between Dover and Calais and saw beloved
England once more under my view--England, which I counted my native
country, being the place I was bred up in, though not born there--a
strange kind of joy possessed my mind, and I had such a longing desire
to be there that I would have given the master of the ship twenty
pistoles to have stood over and set me on shore in the Downs; and when
he told me he could not do it--that is, that he durst not do it if I
would have given him a hundred pistoles--I secretly wished that a storm
would rise that might drive the ship over to the coast of England,
whether they would or not, that I might be set on shore anywhere upon
English ground.

This wicked wish had not been out of my thoughts above two or three
hours, but the master steering away to the north, as was his course to
do, we lost sight of land on that side, and only had the Flemish shore
in view on our right hand, or, as the seamen call it, the starboard
side; and then, with the loss of the sight, the wish for landing in
England abated, and I considered how foolish it was to wish myself out
of the way of my business; that if I had been on shore in England, I
must go back to Holland on account of my bills, which were so
considerable, and I having no correspondence there, that I could not
have managed it without going myself. But we had not been out of sight
of England many hours before the weather began to change; the winds
whistled and made a noise, and the seamen said to one another that it
would blow hard at night. It was then about two hours before sunset, and
we were passed by Dunkirk, and I think they said we were in sight of
Ostend; but then the wind grew high and the sea swelled, and all things
looked terrible, especially to us that understood nothing but just what
we saw before us; in short, night came on, and very dark it was; the
wind freshened and blew harder and harder, and about two hours within
night it blew a terrible storm.

I was not quite a stranger to the sea, having come from Rochelle to
England when I was a child, and gone from London, by the River Thames,
to France afterward, as I have said. But I began to be alarmed a little
with the terrible clamour of the men over my head, for I had never been
in a storm, and so had never seen the like, or heard it; and once
offering to look out at the door of the steerage, as they called it, it
struck me with such horror (the darkness, the fierceness of the wind,
the dreadful height of the waves, and the hurry the Dutch sailors were
in, whose language I did not understand one word of, neither when they
cursed or when they prayed); I say, all these things together filled me
with terror, and, in short, I began to be very much frighted.

When I was come back into the great cabin, there sat Amy, who was very
sea-sick, and I had a little before given her a sup of cordial waters to
help her stomach. When Amy saw me come back and sit down without
speaking, for so I did, she looked two or three times up at me; at last
she came running to me. "Dear madam," says she, "what is the matter?
What makes you look so pale? Why, you an't well; what is the matter?" I
said nothing still, but held up my hands two or three times. Amy doubled
her importunities; upon that I said no more but, "Step to the
steerage-door, and look out, as I did;" so she went away immediately,
and looked too, as I had bidden her; but the poor girl came back again
in the greatest amazement and horror that ever I saw any poor creature
in, wringing her hands and crying out she was undone! she was undone!
she should be drowned! they were all lost! Thus she ran about the cabin
like a mad thing, and as perfectly out of her senses as any one in such
a case could be supposed to be. I was frighted myself, but when I saw
the girl in such a terrible agony, it brought me a little to myself, and
I began to talk to her and put her in a little hope. I told her there
was many a ship in a storm that was not cast away, and I hoped we should
not be drowned; that it was true the storm was very dreadful, but I did
not see that the seamen were so much concerned as we were. And so I
talked to her as well as I could, though my heart was full enough of it,
as well as Amy's; and death began to stare in my face; ay, and something
else too--that is to say, conscience, and my mind was very much
disturbed; but I had nobody to comfort me.

But Amy being in so much worse a condition--that is to say, so much more
terrified at the storm than I was--I had something to do to comfort her.
She was, as I have said, like one distracted, and went raving about the
cabin, crying out she was undone! undone! she should be drowned! and the
like. And at last, the ship giving a jerk, by the force, I suppose, of
some violent wave, it threw poor Amy quite down, for she was weak enough
before with being sea-sick, and as it threw her forward, the poor girl
struck her head against the bulk-head, as the seamen call it, of the
cabin, and laid her as dead as a stone upon the floor or deck; that is
to say, she was so to all appearance.

I cried out for help, but it had been all one to have cried out on the
top of a mountain where nobody had been within five miles of me, for the
seamen were so engaged and made so much noise that nobody heard me or
came near me. I opened the great cabin door, and looked into the
steerage to cry for help, but there, to increase my fright, was two
seamen on their knees at prayers, and only one man who steered, and he
made a groaning noise too, which I took to be saying his prayers, but it
seems it was answering to those above, when they called to him to tell
him which way to steer.

Here was no help for me, or for poor Amy, and there she lay still so,
and in such a condition, that I did not know whether she was dead or
alive. In this fright I went to her, and lifted her a little way up,
setting her on the deck, with her back to the boards of the bulk-head;
and I got a little bottle out of my pocket, and I held it to her nose,
and rubbed her temples and what else I could do, but still Amy showed no
signs of life, till I felt for her pulse, but could hardly distinguish
her to be alive. However, after a great while, she began to revive, and
in about half-an-hour she came to herself, but remembered nothing at
first of what had happened to her for a good while more.

When she recovered more fully, she asked me where she was. I told her
she was in the ship yet, but God knows how long it might be. "Why,
madam," says she, "is not the storm over?" "No, no," says I, "Amy."
"Why, madam," says she, "it was calm just now" (meaning when she was in
the swooning fit occasioned by her fall). "Calm, Amy!" says I. "'Tis far
from calm. It may be it will be calm by-and-by, when we are all drowned
and gone to heaven."

"Heaven, madam!" says she. "What makes you talk so? Heaven! I go to
heaven! No, no; if I am drowned I am damned! Don't you know what a
wicked creature I have been? I have been a whore to two men, and have
lived a wretched, abominable life of vice and wickedness for fourteen
years. Oh, madam! you know it, and God knows it, and now I am to die--to
be drowned! Oh! what will become of me? I am undone for ever!--ay,
madam, for ever! to all eternity! Oh! I am lost! I am lost! If I am
drowned, I am lost for ever!"

All these, you will easily suppose, must be so many stabs into the very
soul of one in my own case. It immediately occurred to me, "Poor Amy!
what art thou that I am not? What hast thou been that I have not been?
Nay, I am guilty of my own sin and thine too." Then it came to my
remembrance that I had not only been the same with Amy, but that I had
been the devil's instrument to make her wicked; that I had stripped her,
and prostituted her to the very man that I had been naught with myself;
that she had but followed me, I had been her wicked example; and I had
led her into all; and that, as we had sinned together, now we were
likely to sink together.

All this repeated itself to my thoughts at that very moment, and every
one of Amy's cries sounded thus in my ears: "I am the wicked cause of it
all! I have been thy ruin, Amy! I have brought thee to this, and now
thou art to suffer for the sin I have enticed thee to! And if thou art
lost for ever, what must I be? what must be my portion?"

It is true this difference was between us, that I said all these things
within myself, and sighed and mourned inwardly; but Amy, as her temper
was more violent, spoke aloud, and cried, and called out aloud, like one
in agony.

I had but small encouragement to give her, and indeed could say but very
little, but I got her to compose herself a little, and not let any of
the people of the ship understand what she meant or what she said; but
even in her greatest composure she continued to express herself with the
utmost dread and terror on account of the wicked life she had lived,
crying out she should be damned, and the like, which was very terrible
to me, who knew what condition I was in myself.

Upon these serious considerations, I was very penitent too for my former
sins, and cried out, though softly, two or three times, "Lord, have
mercy upon me!" To this I added abundance of resolutions of what a life
I would live if it should please God but to spare my life but this one
time; how I would live a single and a virtuous life, and spend a great
deal of what I had thus wickedly got in acts of charity and doing good.

Under these dreadful apprehensions I looked back on the life I had led
with the utmost contempt and abhorrence. I blushed, and wondered at
myself how I could act thus, how I could divest myself of modesty and
honour, and prostitute myself for gain; and I thought, if ever it should
please God to spare me this one time from death, it would not be
possible that I should be the same creature again.

Amy went farther; she prayed, she resolved, she vowed to lead a new
life, if God would spare her but this time. It now began to be daylight,
for the storm held all night long, and it was some comfort to see the
light of another day, which none of us expected; but the sea went
mountains high, and the noise of the water was as frightful to us as the
sight of the waves; nor was any land to be seen, nor did the seamen know
whereabout they were. At last, to our great joy, they made land, which
was in England, and on the coast of Suffolk; and the ship being in the
utmost distress, they ran for the shore at all hazards, and with great
difficulty got into Harwich, where they were safe, as to the danger of
death; but the ship was so full of water and so much damaged that if
they had not laid her on shore the same day she would have sunk before
night, according to the opinion of the seamen, and of the workmen on
shore too who were hired to assist them in stopping their leaks.

Amy was revived as soon as she heard they had espied land, and went out
upon the deck; but she soon came in again to me. "Oh, madam!" says she,
"there's the land indeed to be seen. It looks like a ridge of clouds,
and may be all a cloud for aught I know; but if it be land, 'tis a
great way off, and the sea is in such a combustion, we shall all perish
before we can reach it. 'Tis the dreadfullest sight to look at the
waves that ever was seen. Why, they are as high as mountains; we shall
certainly be all swallowed up, for all the land is so near."

I had conceived some hope that, if they saw land, we should be
delivered; and I told her she did not understand things of that nature;
that she might be sure if they saw land they would go directly towards
it, and would make into some harbour; but it was, as Amy said, a
frightful distance to it. The land looked like clouds, and the sea went
as high as mountains, so that no hope appeared in the seeing the land,
but we were in fear of foundering before we could reach it. This made
Amy so desponding still; but as the wind, which blew from the east, or
that way, drove us furiously towards the land, so when, about
half-an-hour after, I stepped to the steerage-door and looked out, I saw
the land much nearer than Amy represented it; so I went in and
encouraged Amy again, and indeed was encouraged myself.

In about an hour, or something more, we saw, to our infinite
satisfaction, the open harbour of Harwich, and the vessel standing
directly towards it, and in a few minutes more the ship was in smooth
water, to our inexpressible comfort; and thus I had, though against my
will and contrary to my true interest, what I wished for, to be driven
away to England, though it was by a storm.

Nor did this incident do either Amy or me much service, for, the danger
being over, the fears of death vanished with it; ay, and our fear of
what was beyond death also. Our sense of the life we had lived went off,
and with our return to life our wicked taste of life returned, and we
were both the same as before, if not worse. So certain is it that the
repentance which is brought about by the mere apprehensions of death
wears off as those apprehensions wear off, and deathbed repentance, or
storm repentance, which is much the same, is seldom true.

However, I do not tell you that this was all at once neither; the fright
we had at sea lasted a little while afterwards; at least the impression
was not quite blown off as soon as the storm; especially poor Amy. As
soon as she set her foot on shore she fell flat upon the ground and
kissed it, and gave God thanks for her deliverance from the sea; and
turning to me when she got up, "I hope, madam," says she, "you will
never go upon the sea again."

I know not what ailed me, not I; but Amy was much more penitent at sea,
and much more sensible of her deliverance when she landed and was safe,
than I was. I was in a kind of stupidity, I know not well what to call
it; I had a mind full of horror in the time of the storm, and saw death
before me as plainly as Amy, but my thoughts got no vent, as Amy's did.
I had a silent, sullen kind of grief, which could not break out either
in words or tears, and which was therefore much the worse to bear.

I had a terror upon me for my wicked life past, and firmly believed I
was going to the bottom, launching into death, where I was to give an
account of all my past actions; and in this state, and on that account,
I looked back upon my wickedness with abhorrence, as I have said above,
but I had no sense of repentance from the true motive of repentance; I
saw nothing of the corruption of nature, the sin of my life, as an
offence against God, as a thing odious to the holiness of His being, as
abusing His mercy and despising His goodness. In short, I had no
thorough effectual repentance, no sight of my sins in their proper
shape, no view of a Redeemer, or hope in Him. I had only such a
repentance as a criminal has at the place of execution, who is sorry,
not that he has committed the crime, as it is a crime, but sorry that he
is to be hanged for it.

It is true Amy's repentance wore off too, as well as mine, but not so
soon. However, we were both very grave for a time.

As soon as we could get a boat from the town we went on shore, and
immediately went to a public-house in the town of Harwich, where we
were to consider seriously what was to be done, and whether we should go
up to London or stay till the ship was refitted, which, they said, would
be a fortnight, and then go for Holland, as we intended, and as business
required.

Reason directed that I should go to Holland, for there I had all my
money to receive, and there I had persons of good reputation and
character to apply to, having letters to them from the honest Dutch
merchant at Paris, and they might perhaps give me a recommendation again
to merchants in London, and so I should get acquaintance with some
people of figure, which was what I loved; whereas now I knew not one
creature in the whole city of London, or anywhere else, that I could go
and make myself known to. Upon these considerations, I resolved to go to
Holland, whatever came of it.

But Amy cried and trembled, and was ready to fall into fits, when I did
but mention going upon the sea again, and begged of me not to go, or if
I would go, that I would leave her behind, though I was to send her
a-begging. The people in the inn laughed at her, and jested with her,
asked her if she had any sins to confess that she was ashamed should be
heard of, and that she was troubled with an evil conscience; told her,
if she came to sea, and to be in a storm, if she had lain with her
master, she would certainly tell her mistress of it, and that it was a
common thing for poor maids to confess all the young men they had lain
with; that there was one poor girl that went over with her mistress,
whose husband was a ......r, in ......, in the city of London, who
confessed, in the terror of a storm, that she had lain with her master,
and all the apprentices, so often, and in such-and-such places, and made
the poor mistress, when she returned to London, fly at her husband, and
make such a stir as was indeed the ruin of the whole family. Amy could
bear all that well enough, for though she had indeed lain with her
master, it was with her mistress's knowledge and consent, and, which was
worse, was her mistress's own doing. I record it to the reproach of my
own vice, and to expose the excesses of such wickedness as they deserve
to be exposed.

I thought Amy's fear would have been over by that time the ship would be
gotten ready, but I found the girl was rather worse and worse; and when
I came to the point that we must go on board or lose the passage, Amy
was so terrified that she fell into fits; so the ship went away without
us.

But my going being absolutely necessary, as above, I was obliged to go
in the packet-boat some time after, and leave Amy behind at Harwich, but
with directions to go to London and stay there to receive letters and
orders from me what to do. Now I was become, from a lady of pleasure, a
woman of business, and of great business too, I assure you.

I got me a servant at Harwich to go over with me, who had been at
Rotterdam, knew the place, and spoke the language, which was a great
help to me, and away I went. I had a very quick passage and pleasant
weather, and, coming to Rotterdam, soon found out the merchant to whom I
was recommended, who received me with extraordinary respect. And first
he acknowledged the accepted bill for four thousand pistoles, which he
afterwards paid punctually; other bills that I had also payable at
Amsterdam he procured to be received for me; and whereas one of the
bills for one thousand two hundred crowns was protested at Amsterdam, he
paid it me himself, for the honour of the indorser, as he called it,
which was my friend the merchant at Paris.

There I entered into a negotiation by his means for my jewels, and he
brought me several jewellers to look on them, and particularly one to
value them, and to tell me what every particular was worth. This was a
man who had great skill in jewels, but did not trade at that time, and
he was desired by the gentleman that I was with to see that I might not
be imposed upon.

All this work took me up near half a year, and by managing my business
thus myself, and having large sums to do with, I became as expert in it
as any she-merchant of them all. I had credit in the bank for a large
sum of money, and bills and notes for much more.

After I had been here about three months, my maid Amy writes me word
that she had received a letter from her friend, as she called him. That,
by the way, was the prince's gentleman, that had been Amy's
extraordinary friend indeed, for Amy owned to me he had lain with her a
hundred times, that is to say, as often as he pleased, and perhaps in
the eight years which that affair lasted it might be a great deal
oftener. This was what she called her friend, who she corresponded with
upon this particular subject, and, among other things, sent her this
particular news, that my extraordinary friend, my real husband, who rode
in the _gens d'armes_, was dead, that he was killed in a rencounter, as
they call it, or accidental scuffle among the troopers; and so the jade
congratulated me upon my being now a real free woman. "And now, madam,"
says she at the end of her letter, "you have nothing to do but to come
hither and set up a coach and a good equipage, and if beauty and a good
fortune won't make you a duchess, nothing will." But I had not fixed my
measures yet. I had no inclination to be a wife again. I had had such
bad luck with my first husband, I hated the thoughts of it. I found
that a wife is treated with indifference, a mistress with a strong
passion; a wife is looked upon as but an upper servant, a mistress is a
sovereign; a wife must give up all she has, have every reserve she makes
for herself be thought hard of, and be upbraided with her very
pin-money, whereas a mistress makes the saying true, that what the man
has is hers, and what she has is her own; the wife bears a thousand
insults, and is forced to sit still and bear it, or part, and be undone;
a mistress insulted helps herself immediately, and takes another.

These were my wicked arguments for whoring, for I never set against them
the difference another way--I may say, every other way; how that, first,
a wife appears boldly and honourably with her husband, lives at home,
and possesses his house, his servants, his equipages, and has a right to
them all, and to call them her own; entertains his friends, owns his
children, and has the return of duty and affection from them, as they
are here her own, and claims upon his estate, by the custom of England,
if he dies and leaves her a widow.

The whore skulks about in lodgings, is visited in the dark, disowned
upon all occasions before God and man; is maintained, indeed, for a
time, but is certainly condemned to be abandoned at last, and left to
the miseries of fate and her own just disaster. If she has any
children, her endeavour is to get rid of them, and not maintain them;
and if she lives, she is certain to see them all hate her, and be
ashamed of her. While the vice rages, and the man is in the devil's
hand, she has him; and while she has him, she makes a prey of him; but
if he happens to fall sick, if any disaster befalls him, the cause of
all lies upon her. He is sure to lay all his misfortunes at her door;
and if once he comes to repentance, or makes but one step towards a
reformation, he begins with her--leaves her, uses her as she deserves,
hates her, abhors her, and sees her no more; and that with this
never-failing addition, namely, that the more sincere and unfeigned his
repentance is, the more earnestly he looks up, and the more effectually
he looks in, the more his aversion to her increases, and he curses her
from the bottom of his soul; nay, it must be a kind of excess of charity
if he so much as wishes God may forgive her.

The opposite circumstances of a wife and whore are such and so many, and
I have since seen the difference with such eyes, as I could dwell upon
the subject a great while; but my business is history. I had a long
scene of folly yet to run over. Perhaps the moral of all my story may
bring me back again to this part, and if it does I shall speak of it
fully.

While I continued in Holland I received several letters from my friend
(so I had good reason to call him) the merchant in Paris, in which he
gave me a farther account of the conduct of that rogue the Jew, and how
he acted after I was gone; how impatient he was while the said merchant
kept him in suspense, expecting me to come again; and how he raged when
he found I came no more.

It seems, after he found I did not come, he found out by his unwearied
inquiry where I had lived, and that I had been kept as a mistress by
some great person; but he could never learn by who, except that he
learnt the colour of his livery. In pursuit of this inquiry he guessed
at the right person, but could not make it out, or offer any positive
proof of it; but he found out the prince's gentleman, and talked so
saucily to him of it that the gentleman treated him, as the French call
it, _à coup de baton_--that is to say, caned him very severely, as he
deserved; and that not satisfying him, or curing his insolence, he was
met one night late upon the Pont Neuf, in Paris, by two men, who,
muffling him up in a great cloak, carried him into a more private place
and cut off both his ears, telling him it was for talking impudently of
his superiors; adding that he should take care to govern his tongue
better and behave with more manners, or the next time they would cut his
tongue out of his head.

This put a check to his sauciness that way; but he comes back to the
merchant and threatened to begin a process against him for corresponding
with me, and being accessory to the murder of the jeweller, &c.

The merchant found by his discourse that he supposed I was protected by
the said Prince de ----; nay, the rogue said he was sure I was in his
lodgings at Versailles, for he never had so much as the least intimation
of the way I was really gone; but that I was there he was certain, and
certain that the merchant was privy to it. The merchant bade him
defiance. However, he gave him a great deal of trouble and put him to a
great charge, and had like to have brought him in for a party to my
escape; in which case he would have been obliged to have produced me,
and that in the penalty of some capital sum of money.

But the merchant was too many for him another way, for he brought an
information against him for a cheat; wherein laying down the whole fact,
how he intended falsely to accuse the widow of the jeweller for the
supposed murder of her husband; that he did it purely to get the jewels
from her; and that he offered to bring him (the merchant) in, to be
confederate with him, and to share the jewels between them; proving also
his design to get the jewels into his hands, and then to have dropped
the prosecution upon condition of my quitting the jewels to him. Upon
this charge he got him laid by the heels; so he was sent to the
Conciergerie--that is to say, to Bridewell--and the merchant cleared. He
got out of jail in a little while, though not without the help of money,
and continued teasing the merchant a long while, and at last threatening
to assassinate and murder him. So the merchant, who, having buried his
wife about two months before, was now a single man, and not knowing what
such a villain might do, thought fit to quit Paris, and came away to
Holland also.

It is most certain that, speaking of originals, I was the source and
spring of all that trouble and vexation to this honest gentleman; and as
it was afterwards in my power to have made him full satisfaction, and
did not, I cannot say but I added ingratitude to all the rest of my
follies; but of that I shall give a fuller account presently.

I was surprised one morning, when, being at the merchant's house who he
had recommended me to in Rotterdam, and being busy in his
counting-house, managing my bills, and preparing to write a letter to
him to Paris, I heard a noise of horses at the door, which is not very
common in a city where everybody passes by water; but he had, it seems,
ferried over the Maas from Willemstadt, and so came to the very door,
and I, looking towards the door upon hearing the horses, saw a gentleman
alight and come in at the gate. I knew nothing, and expected nothing,
to be sure, of the person; but, as I say, was surprised, and indeed more
than ordinarily surprised, when, coming nearer to me, I saw it was my
merchant of Paris, my benefactor, and indeed my deliverer.

I confess it was an agreeable surprise to me, and I was exceeding glad
to see him, who was so honourable and so kind to me, and who indeed had
saved my life. As soon as he saw me he ran to me, took me in his arms,
and kissed me with a freedom that he never offered to take with me
before. "Dear Madam ----," says he, "I am glad to see you safe in this
country; if you had stayed two days longer in Paris you had been
undone." I was so glad to see him that I could not speak a good while,
and I burst out into tears without speaking a word for a minute; but I
recovered that disorder, and said, "The more, sir, is my obligation to
you that saved my life;" and added, "I am glad to see you here, that I
may consider how to balance an account in which I am so much your
debtor." "You and I will adjust that matter easily," says he, "now we
are so near together. Pray where do you lodge?" says he.

"In a very honest, good house," said I, "where that gentleman, your
friend, recommended me," pointing to the merchant in whose house we then
were.

"And where you may lodge too, sir," says the gentleman, "if it suits
with your business and your other conveniency."

"With all my heart," says he. "Then, madam," adds he, turning to me, "I
shall be near you, and have time to tell you a story which will be very
long, and yet many ways very pleasant to you; how troublesome that
devilish fellow, the Jew, has been to me on your account, and what a
hellish snare he had laid for you, if he could have found you."

"I shall have leisure too, sir," said I, "to tell you all my adventures
since that, which have not been a few, I assure you."

In short, he took up his lodgings in the same house where I lodged, and
the room he lay in opened, as he was wishing it would, just opposite to
my lodging-room, so we could almost call out of bed to one another; and
I was not at all shy of him on that score, for I believed him perfectly
honest, and so indeed he was; and if he had not, that article was at
present no part of my concern.

It was not till two or three days, and after his first hurries of
business were over, that we began to enter into the history of our
affairs on every side, but when we began, it took up all our
conversation for almost a fortnight. First, I gave him a particular
account of everything that happened material upon my voyage, and how we
were driven into Harwich by a very terrible storm; how I had left my
woman behind me, so frighted with the danger she had been in that she
durst not venture to set her foot into a ship again any more, and that I
had not come myself if the bills I had of him had not been payable in
Holland; but that money, he might see, would make a woman go anywhere.

He seemed to laugh at all our womanish fears upon the occasion of the
storm, telling me it was nothing but what was very ordinary in those
seas, but that they had harbours on every coast so near that they were
seldom in danger of being lost indeed. "For," says he, "if they cannot
fetch one coast, they can always stand away for another, and run afore
it," as he called it, "for one side or other." But when I came to tell
him what a crazy ship it was, and how, even when they got into Harwich,
and into smooth water, they were fain to run the ship on shore, or she
would have sunk in the very harbour; and when I told him that when I
looked out at the cabin-door I saw the Dutchmen, one upon his knees
here, and another there, at their prayers, then indeed he acknowledged I
had reason to be alarmed; but, smiling, he added, "But you, madam," says
he, "are so good a lady, and so pious, you would but have gone to heaven
a little the sooner; the difference had not been much to you."

I confess when he said this it made all the blood turn in my veins, and
I thought I should have fainted. "Poor gentleman," thought I, "you know
little of me. What would I give to be really what you really think me to
be!" He perceived the disorder, but said nothing till I spoke; when,
shaking my head, "Oh, sir!" said I, "death in any shape has some terror
in it, but in the frightful figure of a storm at sea and a sinking ship,
it comes with a double, a treble, and indeed an inexpressible horror;
and if I were that saint you think me to be (which God knows I am not),
it is still very dismal. I desire to die in a calm, if I can." He said a
great many good things, and very prettily ordered his discourse between
serious reflection and compliment, but I had too much guilt to relish it
as it was meant, so I turned it off to something else, and talked of the
necessity I had on me to come to Holland, but I wished myself safe on
shore in England again.

He told me he was glad I had such an obligation upon me to come over
into Holland, however, but hinted that he was so interested in my
welfare, and, besides, had such further designs upon me, that if I had
not so happily been found in Holland he was resolved to have gone to
England to see me, and that it was one of the principal reasons of his
leaving Paris.

I told him I was extremely obliged to him for so far interesting himself
in my affairs, but that I had been so far his debtor before that I knew
not how anything could increase the debt; for I owed my life to him
already, and I could not be in debt for anything more valuable than
that. He answered in the most obliging manner possible, that he would
put it in my power to pay that debt, and all the obligations besides
that ever he had, or should be able to lay upon me.

I began to understand him now, and to see plainly that he resolved to
make love to me, but I would by no means seem to take the hint; and,
besides, I knew that he had a wife with him in Paris; and I had, just
then at least, no gust to any more intriguing. However, he surprised me
into a sudden notice of the thing a little while after by saying
something in his discourse that he did, as he said, in his wife's days.
I started at that word, "What mean you by that, sir?" said I. "Have you
not a wife at Paris?" "No, madam, indeed," said he; "my wife died the
beginning of September last," which, it seems, was but a little after I
came away.

We lived in the same house all this while, and as we lodged not far off
of one another, opportunities were not wanting of as near an
acquaintance as we might desire; nor have such opportunities the least
agency in vicious minds to bring to pass even what they might not intend
at first.

However, though he courted so much at a distance, yet his pretensions
were very honourable; and as I had before found him a most
disinterested friend, and perfectly honest in his dealings, even when I
trusted him with all I had, so now I found him strictly virtuous, till I
made him otherwise myself, even almost whether he would or no, as you
shall hear.

It was not long after our former discourse, when he repeated what he had
insinuated before, namely, that he had yet a design to lay before me,
which, if I would agree to his proposals, would more than balance all
accounts between us. I told him I could not reasonably deny him
anything; and except one thing, which I hoped and believed he would not
think of, I should think myself very ungrateful if I did not do
everything for him that lay in my power.

He told me what he should desire of me would be fully in my power to
grant, or else he should be very unfriendly to offer it; and still all
this while he declined making the proposal, as he called it, and so for
that time we ended our discourse, turning it off to other things. So
that, in short, I began to think he might have met with some disaster in
his business, and might have come away from Paris in some discredit, or
had had some blow on his affairs in general; and as really I had
kindness enough to have parted with a good sum to have helped him, and
was in gratitude bound to have done so, he having so effectually saved
to me all I had, so I resolved to make him the offer the first time I
had an opportunity, which two or three days after offered itself, very
much to my satisfaction.

He had told me at large, though on several occasions, the treatment he
had met with from the Jew, and what expense he had put him to; how at
length he had cast him, as above, and had recovered good damage of him,
but that the rogue was unable to make him any considerable reparation.
He had told me also how the Prince de ----'s gentleman had resented his
treatment of his master, and how he had caused him to be used upon the
Pont Neuf, &c., as I have mentioned above, which I laughed at most
heartily.

"It is a pity," said I, "that I should sit here and make that gentleman
no amends; if you would direct me, sir," said I, "how to do it, I would
make him a handsome present, and acknowledge the justice he had done to
me, as well as to the prince, his master." He said he would do what I
directed in it; so I told him I would send him five hundred crowns.
"That's too much," said he, "for you are but half interested in the
usage of the Jew; it was on his master's account he corrected him, not
on yours." Well, however, we were obliged to do nothing in it, for
neither of us knew how to direct a letter to him, or to direct anybody
to him; so I told him I would leave it till I came to England, for that
my woman, Amy, corresponded with him, and that he had made love to her.

"Well, but, sir," said I, "as, in requital for his generous concern for
me, I am careful to think of him, it is but just that what expense you
have been obliged to be at, which was all on my account, should be
repaid you; and therefore," said I, "let me see--." And there I paused,
and began to reckon up what I had observed, from his own discourse, it
had cost him in the several disputes and hearings which he had with that
dog of a Jew, and I cast them up at something above 2130 crowns; so I
pulled out some bills which I had upon a merchant in Amsterdam, and a
particular account in bank, and was looking on them in order to give
them to him; when he, seeing evidently what I was going about,
interrupted me with some warmth, and told me he would have nothing of me
on that account, and desired I would not pull out my bills and papers on
that score; that he had not told me the story on that account, or with
any such view; that it had been his misfortune first to bring that ugly
rogue to me, which, though it was with a good design, yet he would
punish himself with the expense he had been at for his being so unlucky
to me; that I could not think so hard of him as to suppose he would take
money of me, a widow, for serving me, and doing acts of kindness to me
in a strange country, and in distress too; but he said he would repeat
what he had said before, that he kept me for a deeper reckoning, and
that, as he had told me, he would put me into a posture to even all that
favour, as I called it, at once, so we should talk it over another time,
and balance all together.

Now I expected it would come out, but still he put it off, as before,
from whence I concluded it could not be matter of love, for that those
things are not usually delayed in such a manner, and therefore it must
be matter of money. Upon which thought I broke the silence, and told
him, that as he knew I had, by obligation, more kindness for him than to
deny any favour to him that I could grant, and that he seemed backward
to mention his case, I begged leave of him to give me leave to ask him
whether anything lay upon his mind with respect to his business and
effects in the world; that if it did, he knew what I had in the world as
well as I did, and that, if he wanted money, I would let him have any
sum for his occasion, as far as five or six thousand pistoles, and he
should pay me as his own affairs would permit; and that, if he never
paid me, I would assure him that I would never give him any trouble for
it.

He rose up with ceremony, and gave me thanks in terms that sufficiently
told me he had been bred among people more polite and more courteous
than is esteemed the ordinary usage of the Dutch; and after his
compliment was over he came nearer to me, and told me he was obliged to
assure me, though with repeated acknowledgments of my kind offer, that
he was not in any want of money; that he had met with no uneasiness in
any of his affairs--no, not of any kind whatever, except that of the
loss of his wife and one of his children, which indeed had troubled him
much; but that this was no part of what he had to offer me, and by
granting which I should balance all obligations; but that, in short, it
was that, seeing Providence had (as it were for that purpose) taken his
wife from him, I would make up the loss to him; and with that he held me
fast in his arms, and, kissing me, would not give me leave to say no,
and hardly to breathe.

At length, having got room to speak, I told him that, as I had said
before, I could deny him but one thing in the world; I was very sorry he
should propose that thing only that I could not grant.

I could not but smile, however, to myself that he should make so many
circles and roundabout motions to come at a discourse which had no such
rarity at the bottom of it, if he had known all. But there was another
reason why I resolved not to have him, when, at the same time, if he had
courted me in a manner less honest or virtuous, I believe I should not
have denied him; but I shall come to that part presently.

He was, as I have said, long a-bringing it out, but when he had brought
it out he pursued it with such importunities as would admit of no
denial; at least he intended they should not; but I resisted them
obstinately, and yet with expressions of the utmost kindness and respect
for him that could be imagined, often telling him there was nothing else
in the world that I could deny him, and showing him all the respect, and
upon all occasions treating him with intimacy and freedom, as if he had
been my brother.

He tried all the ways imaginable to bring his design to pass, but I was
inflexible. At last he thought of a way which, he flattered himself,
would not fail; nor would he have been mistaken, perhaps, in any other
woman in the world but me. This was, to try if he could take me at an
advantage and get to bed to me, and then, as was most rational to think,
I should willingly enough marry him afterwards.

We were so intimate together that nothing but man and wife could, or at
least ought, to be more; but still our freedoms kept within the bounds
of modesty and decency. But one evening, above all the rest, we were
very merry, and I fancied he pushed the mirth to watch for his
advantage, and I resolved that I would at least feign to be as merry as
he; and that, in short, if he offered anything he should have his will
easily enough.

About one o'clock in the morning--for so long we sat up together--I
said, "Come, 'tis one o'clock; I must go to bed." "Well," says he, "I'll
go with you." "No, no;" says I; "go to your own chamber." He said he
would go to bed with me. "Nay," says I, "if you will, I don't know what
to say; if I can't help it, you must." However, I got from him, left
him, and went into my chamber, but did not shut the door, and as he
could easily see that I was undressing myself, he steps to his own room,
which was but on the same floor, and in a few minutes undresses himself
also, and returns to my door in his gown and slippers.

I thought he had been gone indeed, and so that he had been in jest; and,
by the way, thought either he had no mind to the thing, or that he never
intended it; so I shut my door--that is, latched it, for I seldom locked
or bolted it--and went to bed. I had not been in bed a minute but he
comes in his gown to the door and opens it a little way, but not enough
to come in or look in, and says softly, "What! are you really gone to
bed?" "Yes, yes," says I; "get you gone." "No, indeed," says he, "I
shall not be gone; you gave me leave before to come to bed, and you
shan't say 'Get you gone' now." So he comes into my room, and then
turns about and fastens the door, and immediately comes to the bedside
to me. I pretended to scold and struggle, and bid him begone with more
warmth than before; but it was all one; he had not a rag of clothes on
but his gown and slippers and shirt, so he throws off his gown, and
throws open the bed, and came in at once.

I made a seeming resistance, but it was no more indeed; for, as above, I
resolved from the beginning he should lie with me if he would, and, for
the rest, I left it to come after.

Well, he lay with me that night, and the two next, and very merry we
were all the three days between; but the third night he began to be a
little more grave. "Now, my dear," says he, "though I have pushed this
matter farther than ever I intended, or than I believe you expected from
me, who never made any pretences to you but what were very honest, yet
to heal it all up, and let you see how sincerely I meant at first, and
how honest I will ever be to you, I am ready to marry you still, and
desire you to let it be done to-morrow morning; and I will give you the
same fair conditions of marriage as I would have done before."

This, it must be owned, was a testimony that he was very honest, and
that he loved me sincerely; but I construed it quite another way,
namely, that he aimed at the money. But how surprised did he look, and
how was he confounded, when he found me receive his proposal with
coldness and indifference, and still tell him that it was the only thing
I could not grant!

He was astonished. "What! not take me now," says he, "when I have been
abed with you!" I answered coldly, though respectfully still, "It is
true, to my shame be it spoken," says I, "that you have taken me by
surprise, and have had your will of me; but I hope you will not take it
ill that I cannot consent to marry for all that. If I am with child,"
said I, "care must be taken to manage that as you shall direct; I hope
you won't expose me for my having exposed myself to you, but I cannot go
any farther." And at that point I stood, and would hear of no matrimony
by any means.

Now, because this may seem a little odd, I shall state the matter
clearly, as I understood it myself. I knew that, while I was a mistress,
it is customary for the person kept to receive from them that keep; but
if I should be a wife, all I had then was given up to the husband, and I
was henceforth to be under his authority only; and as I had money
enough, and needed not fear being what they call a cast-off mistress, so
I had no need to give him twenty thousand pounds to marry me, which had
been buying my lodging too dear a great deal.

Thus his project of coming to bed to me was a bite upon himself, while
he intended it for a bite upon me; and he was no nearer his aim of
marrying me than he was before. All his arguments he could urge upon the
subject of matrimony were at an end, for I positively declined marrying
him; and as he had refused the thousand pistoles which I had offered him
in compensation for his expenses and loss at Paris with the Jew, and had
done it upon the hopes he had of marrying me, so when he found his way
difficult still, he was amazed, and, I had some reason to believe,
repented that he had refused the money.

But thus it is when men run into wicked measures to bring their designs
about. I, that was infinitely obliged to him before, began to talk to
him as if I had balanced accounts with him now, and that the favour of
lying with a whore was equal, not to the thousand pistoles only, but to
all the debt I owed him for saving my life and all my effects.

But he drew himself into it, and though it was a dear bargain, yet it
was a bargain of his own making; he could not say I had tricked him into
it. But as he projected and drew me in to lie with him, depending that
was a sure game in order to a marriage, so I granted him the favour, as
he called it, to balance the account of favours received from him, and
keep the thousand pistoles with a good grace.

He was extremely disappointed in this article, and knew not how to
manage for a great while; and as I dare say, if he had not expected to
have made it an earnest for marrying me, he would not have attempted me
the other way, so, I believed, if it had not been for the money which he
knew I had, he would never have desired to marry me after he had lain
with me. For where is the man that cares to marry a whore, though of his
own making? And as I knew him to be no fool, so I did him no wrong when
I supposed that, but for the money, he would not have had any thoughts
of me that way, especially after my yielding as I had done; in which it
is to be remembered that I made no capitulation for marrying him when I
yielded to him, but let him do just what he pleased, without any
previous bargain.

Well, hitherto we went upon guesses at one another's designs; but as he
continued to importune me to marry, though he had lain with me, and
still did lie with me as often as he pleased, and I continued to refuse
to marry him, though I let him lie with me whenever he desired it; I
say, as these two circumstances made up our conversation, it could not
continue long thus, but we must come to an explanation.

One morning, in the middle of our unlawful freedoms--that is to say,
when we were in bed together--he sighed, and told me he desired my
leave to ask me one question, and that I would give him an answer to it
with the same ingenious freedom and honesty that I had used to treat him
with. I told him I would. Why, then, his question was, why I would not
marry him, seeing I allowed him all the freedom of a husband. "Or," says
he, "my dear, since you have been so kind as to take me to your bed, why
will you not make me your own, and take me for good and all, that we may
enjoy ourselves without any reproach to one another?"

I told him, that as I confessed it was the only thing I could not comply
with him in, so it was the only thing in all my actions that I could not
give him a reason for; that it was true I had let him come to bed to me,
which was supposed to be the greatest favour a woman could grant; but it
was evident, and he might see it, that, as I was sensible of the
obligation I was under to him for saving me from the worst circumstance
it was possible for me to be brought to, I could deny him nothing; and
if I had had any greater favour to yield him, I should have done it,
that of matrimony only excepted, and he could not but see that I loved
him to an extraordinary degree, in every part of my behaviour to him;
but that as to marrying, which was giving up my liberty, it was what
once he knew I had done, and he had seen how it had hurried me up and
down in the world, and what it had exposed me to; that I had an aversion
to it, and desired he would not insist upon it. He might easily see I
had no aversion to him; and that, if I was with child by him, he should
see a testimony of my kindness to the father, for that I would settle
all I had in the world upon the child.

He was mute a good while. At last says he, "Come, my dear, you are the
first woman in the world that ever lay with a man and then refused to
marry him, and therefore there must be some other reason for your
refusal; and I have therefore one other request, and that is, if I guess
at the true reason, and remove the objection, will you then yield to
me?" I told him if he removed the objection I must needs comply, for I
should certainly do everything that I had no objection against.

"Why then, my dear, it must be that either you are already engaged or
married to some other man, or you are not willing to dispose of your
money to me, and expect to advance yourself higher with your fortune.
Now, if it be the first of these, my mouth will be stopped, and I have
no more to say; but if it be the last, I am prepared effectually to
remove the objection, and answer all you can say on that subject."

I took him up short at the first of these, telling him he must have base
thoughts of me indeed, to think that I could yield to him in such a
manner as I had done, and continue it with so much freedom as he found I
did, if I had a husband or were engaged to any other man; and that he
might depend upon it that was not my case, nor any part of my case.

"Why then," said he, "as to the other, I have an offer to make to you
that shall take off all the objection, viz., that I will not touch one
pistole of your estate more than shall be with your own voluntary
consent, neither now or at any other time, but you shall settle it as
you please for your life, and upon who you please after your death;"
that I should see he was able to maintain me without it, and that it was
not for that that he followed me from Paris.

I was indeed surprised at that part of his offer, and he might easily
perceive it; it was not only what I did not expect, but it was what I
knew not what answer to make to. He had, indeed, removed my principal
objection--nay, all my objections, and it was not possible for me to
give any answer; for, if upon so generous an offer I should agree with
him, I then did as good as confess that it was upon the account of my
money that I refused him; and that though I could give up my virtue and
expose myself, yet I would not give up my money, which, though it was
true, yet was really too gross for me to acknowledge, and I could not
pretend to marry him upon that principle neither. Then as to having
him, and make over all my estate out of his hands, so as not to give him
the management of what I had, I thought it would be not only a little
Gothic and inhuman, but would be always a foundation of unkindness
between us, and render us suspected one to another; so that, upon the
whole, I was obliged to give a new turn to it, and talk upon a kind of
an elevated strain, which really was not in my thoughts, at first, at
all; for I own, as above, the divesting myself of my estate and putting
my money out of my hand was the sum of the matter that made me refuse to
marry; but, I say, I gave it a new turn upon this occasion, as
follows:--

I told him I had, perhaps, different notions of matrimony from what the
received custom had given us of it; that I thought a woman was a free
agent as well as a man, and was born free, and, could she manage herself
suitably, might enjoy that liberty to as much purpose as the men do;
that the laws of matrimony were indeed otherwise, and mankind at this
time acted quite upon other principles, and those such that a woman gave
herself entirely away from herself, in marriage, and capitulated, only
to be, at best, but an upper servant, and from the time she took the man
she was no better or worse than the servant among the Israelites, who
had his ears bored--that is, nailed to the door-post--who by that act
gave himself up to be a servant during life; that the very nature of the
marriage contract was, in short, nothing but giving up liberty, estate,
authority, and everything to the man, and the woman was indeed a mere
woman ever after--that is to say, a slave.

He replied, that though in some respects it was as I had said, yet I
ought to consider that, as an equivalent to this, the man had all the
care of things devolved upon him; that the weight of business lay upon
his shoulders, and as he had the trust, so he had the toil of life upon
him; his was the labour, his the anxiety of living; that the woman had
nothing to do but to eat the fat and drink the sweet; to sit still and
look around her, be waited on and made much of, be served and loved and
made easy, especially if the husband acted as became him; and that, in
general, the labour of the man was appointed to make the woman live
quiet and unconcerned in the world; that they had the name of subjection
without the thing; and if in inferior families they had the drudgery of
the house and care of the provisions upon them, yet they had indeed much
the easier part; for, in general, the women had only the care of
managing--that is, spending what their husbands get; and that a woman
had the name of subjection, indeed, but that they generally commanded,
not the men only, but all they had; managed all for themselves; and
where the man did his duty, the woman's life was all ease and
tranquillity, and that she had nothing to do but to be easy, and to make
all that were about her both easy and merry.

I returned, that while a woman was single, she was a masculine in her
politic capacity; that she had then the full command of what she had,
and the full direction of what she did; that she was a man in her
separate capacity, to all intents and purposes that a man could be so to
himself; that she was controlled by none, because accountable to none,
and was in subjection to none. So I sung these two lines of Mr. ----'s:--

    "Oh! 'tis pleasant to be free,
    The sweetest Miss is Liberty."

I added, that whoever the woman was that had an estate, and would give
it up to be the slave of a great man, that woman was a fool, and must be
fit for nothing but a beggar; that it was my opinion a woman was as fit
to govern and enjoy her own estate without a man as a man was without a
woman; and that, if she had a mind to gratify herself as to sexes, she
might entertain a man as a man does a mistress; that while she was thus
single she was her own, and if she gave away that power she merited to
be as miserable as it was possible that any creature could be.

All he could say could not answer the force of this as to argument;
only this, that the other way was the ordinary method that the world was
guided by; that he had reason to expect I should be content with that
which all the world was contented with; that he was of the opinion that
a sincere affection between a man and his wife answered all the
objections that I had made about the being a slave, a servant, and the
like; and where there was a mutual love there could be no bondage, but
that there was but one interest, one aim, one design, and all conspired
to make both very happy.

"Ay," said I, "that is the thing I complain of. The pretence of
affection takes from a woman everything that can be called herself; she
is to have no interest, no aim, no view; but all is the interest, aim,
and view of the husband; she is to be the passive creature you spoke
of," said I. "She is to lead a life of perfect indolence, and living by
faith, not in God, but in her husband, she sinks or swims, as he is
either fool or wise man, unhappy or prosperous; and in the middle of
what she thinks is her happiness and prosperity, she is engulfed in
misery and beggary, which she had not the least notice, knowledge, or
suspicion of. How often have I seen a woman living in all the splendour
that a plentiful fortune ought to allow her, with her coaches and
equipages, her family and rich furniture, her attendants and friends,
her visitors and good company, all about her to-day; to-morrow
surprised with a disaster, turned out of all by a commission of
bankrupt, stripped to the clothes on her back; her jointure, suppose she
had it, is sacrificed to the creditors so long as her husband lived, and
she turned into the street, and left to live on the charity of her
friends, if she has any, or follow the monarch, her husband, into the
Mint, and live there on the wreck of his fortunes, till he is forced to
run away from her even there; and then she sees her children starve,
herself miserable, breaks her heart, and cries herself to death! This,"
says I, "is the state of many a lady that has had £10,000 to her
portion."

He did not know how feelingly I spoke this, and what extremities I had
gone through of this kind; how near I was to the very last article
above, viz., crying myself to death; and how I really starved for almost
two years together.

But he shook his head, and said, where had I lived? and what dreadful
families had I lived among, that had frighted me into such terrible
apprehensions of things? that these things indeed might happen where men
run into hazardous things in trade, and, without prudence or due
consideration, launched their fortunes in a degree beyond their
strength, grasping at adventures beyond their stocks, and the like; but
that, as he was stated in the world, if I would embark with him, he had
a fortune equal with mine; that together we should have no occasion of
engaging in business any more, but that in any part of the world where I
had a mind to live, whether England, France, Holland, or where I would,
we might settle, and live as happily as the world could make any one
live; that if I desired the management of our estate, when put together,
if I would not trust him with mine, he would trust me with his; that we
would be upon one bottom, and I should steer. "Ay," says I, "you'll
allow me to steer--that is, hold the helm--but you'll con the ship, as
they call it; that is, as at sea, a boy serves to stand at the helm, but
he that gives him the orders is pilot."

He laughed at my simile. "No," says he; "you shall be pilot then; you
shall con the ship." "Ay," says I, "as long as you please; but you can
take the helm out of my hand when you please, and bid me go spin. It is
not you," says I, "that I suspect, but the laws of matrimony puts the
power into your hands, bids you do it, commands you to command, and
binds me, forsooth, to obey. You, that are now upon even terms with me,
and I with you," says I, "are the next hour set up upon the throne, and
the humble wife placed at your footstool; all the rest, all that you
call oneness of interest, mutual affection, and the like, is courtesy
and kindness then, and a woman is indeed infinitely obliged where she
meets with it, but can't help herself where it fails."

Well, he did not give it over yet, but came to the serious part, and
there he thought he should be too many for me. He first hinted that
marriage was decreed by Heaven; that it was the fixed state of life,
which God had appointed for man's felicity, and for establishing a legal
posterity; that there could be no legal claim of estates by inheritance
but by children born in wedlock; that all the rest was sunk under
scandal and illegitimacy; and very well he talked upon that subject
indeed.

But it would not do; I took him short there. "Look you, sir," said I,
"you have an advantage of me there indeed, in my particular case, but it
would not be generous to make use of it. I readily grant that it were
better for me to have married you than to admit you to the liberty I
have given you, but as I could not reconcile my judgment to marriage,
for the reasons above, and had kindness enough for you, and obligation
too much on me to resist you, I suffered your rudeness and gave up my
virtue. But I have two things before me to heal up that breach of honour
without that desperate one of marriage, and those are, repentance for
what is past, and putting an end to it for time to come."

He seemed to be concerned to think that I should take him in that
manner. He assured me that I misunderstood him; that he had more manners
as well as more kindness for me, and more justice than to reproach me
with what he had been the aggressor in, and had surprised me into; that
what he spoke referred to my words above, that the woman, if she thought
fit, might entertain a man, as a man did a mistress; and that I seemed
to mention that way of living as justifiable, and setting it as a lawful
thing, and in the place of matrimony.

Well, we strained some compliments upon those points, not worth
repeating; and I added, I supposed when he got to bed to me he thought
himself sure of me; and, indeed, in the ordinary course of things, after
he had lain with me he ought to think so, but that, upon the same foot
of argument which I had discoursed with him upon, it was just the
contrary; and when a woman had been weak enough to yield up the last
point before wedlock, it would be adding one weakness to another to take
the man afterwards, to pin down the shame of it upon herself all the
days of her life, and bind herself to live all her time with the only
man that could upbraid her with it; that in yielding at first, she must
be a fool, but to take the man is to be sure to be called fool; that to
resist a man is to act with courage and vigour, and to cast off the
reproach, which, in the course of things, drops out of knowledge and
dies. The man goes one way and the woman another, as fate and the
circumstances of living direct; and if they keep one another's counsel,
the folly is heard no more of. "But to take the man," says I, "is the
most preposterous thing in nature, and (saving your presence) is to
befoul one's self, and live always in the smell of it. No, no," added I;
"after a man has lain with me as a mistress, he ought never to lie with
me as a wife. That's not only preserving the crime in memory, but it is
recording it in the family. If the woman marries the man afterwards, she
bears the reproach of it to the last hour. If her husband is not a man
of a hundred thousand, he some time or other upbraids her with it. If he
has children, they fail not one way or other to hear of it. If the
children are virtuous, they do their mother the justice to hate her for
it; if they are wicked, they give her the mortification of doing the
like, and giving her for the example. On the other hand, if the man and
the woman part, there is an end of the crime and an end of the clamour;
time wears out the memory of it, or a woman may remove but a few
streets, and she soon outlives it, and hears no more of it."

He was confounded at this discourse, and told me he could not say but I
was right in the main. That as to that part relating to managing
estates, it was arguing _à la cavalier_; it was in some sense right, if
the women were able to carry it on so, but that in general the sex were
not capable of it; their heads were not turned for it, and they had
better choose a person capable and honest, that knew how to do them
justice as women, as well as to love them; and that then the trouble was
all taken off of their hands.

I told him it was a dear way of purchasing their ease, for very often
when the trouble was taken off of their hands, so was their money too;
and that I thought it was far safer for the sex not to be afraid of the
trouble, but to be really afraid of their money; that if nobody was
trusted, nobody would be deceived, and the staff in their own hands was
the best security in the world.

He replied, that I had started a new thing in the world; that however I
might support it by subtle reasoning, yet it was a way of arguing that
was contrary to the general practice, and that he confessed he was much
disappointed in it; that, had he known I would have made such a use of
it, he would never have attempted what he did, which he had no wicked
design in, resolving to make me reparation, and that he was very sorry
he had been so unhappy; that he was very sure he should never upbraid me
with it hereafter, and had so good an opinion of me as to believe I did
not suspect him; but seeing I was positive in refusing him,
notwithstanding what had passed, he had nothing to do but secure me from
reproach by going back again to Paris, that so, according to my own way
of arguing, it might die out of memory, and I might never meet with it
again to my disadvantage.

I was not pleased with this part at all, for I had no mind to let him go
neither, and yet I had no mind to give him such hold of me as he would
have had; and thus I was in a kind of suspense, irresolute, and doubtful
what course to take.

I was in the house with him, as I have observed, and I saw evidently
that he was preparing to go back to Paris; and particularly I found he
was remitting money to Paris, which was, as I understood afterwards, to
pay for some wines which he had given order to have bought for him at
Troyes, in Champagne, and I knew not what course to take; and, besides
that, I was very loth to part with him. I found also that I was with
child by him, which was what I had not yet told him of, and sometimes I
thought not to tell him of it at all; but I was in a strange place, and
had no acquaintance, though I had a great deal of substance, which
indeed, having no friends there, was the more dangerous to me.

This obliged me to take him one morning when I saw him, as I thought, a
little anxious about his going, and irresolute. Says I to him, "I fancy
you can hardly find in your heart to leave me now." "The more unkind is
it in you," said he, "severely unkind, to refuse a man that knows not
how to part with you."

"I am so far from being unkind to you," said I, "that I will go over all
the world with you if you desire me to, except to Paris, where you know
I can't go."

"It is a pity so much love," said he, "on both sides should ever
separate."

"Why, then," said I, "do you go away from me?"

"Because," said he, "you won't take me."

"But if I won't take you," said I, "you may take me anywhere but to
Paris."

He was very loth to go anywhere, he said, without me, but he must go to
Paris or the East Indies.

I told him I did not use to court, but I durst venture myself to the
East Indies with him, if there was a necessity of his going.

He told me, God be thanked he was in no necessity of going anywhere, but
that he had a tempting invitation to go to the Indies.

I answered, I would say nothing to that, but that I desired he would go
anywhere but to Paris, because there he knew I must not go.

He said he had no remedy but to go where I could not go, for he could
not bear to see me if he must not have me.

I told him that was the unkindest thing he could say of me, and that I
ought to take it very ill, seeing I knew how very well to oblige him to
stay, without yielding to what he knew I could not yield to.

This amazed him, and he told me I was pleased to be mysterious, but that
he was sure it was in nobody's power to hinder him going, if he
resolved upon it, except me, who had influence enough upon him to make
him do anything.

Yes, I told him, I could hinder him, because I knew he could no more do
an unkind thing by me than he could do an unjust one; and to put him out
of his pain, I told him I was with child.

He came to me, and taking me in his arms and kissing me a thousand times
almost, said, why would I be so unkind not to tell him that before?

I told him 'twas hard, that to have him stay, I should be forced to do
as criminals do to avoid the gallows, plead my belly; and that I thought
I had given him testimonies enough of an affection equal to that of a
wife, if I had not only lain with him, been with child by him, shown
myself unwilling to part with him, but offered to go to the East Indies
with him; and except one thing that I could not grant, what could he ask
more?

He stood mute a good while, but afterwards told me he had a great deal
more to say if I could assure him that I would not take ill whatever
freedom he might use with me in his discourse.

I told him he might use any freedom in words with me; for a woman who
had given leave to such other freedoms as I had done had left herself no
room to take anything ill, let it be what it would.

"Why, then," he said, "I hope you believe, madam, I was born a
Christian, and that I have some sense of sacred things upon my mind.
When I first broke in upon my own virtue and assaulted yours; when I
surprised and, as it were, forced you to that which neither you intended
or I designed but a few hours before, it was upon a presumption that you
would certainly marry me, if once I could go that length with you, and
it was with an honest resolution to make you my wife.

"But I have been surprised with such a denial that no woman in such
circumstances ever gave to a man; for certainly it was never known that
any woman refused to marry a man that had first lain with her, much less
a man that had gotten her with child. But you go upon different notions
from all the world, and though you reason upon it so strongly that a man
knows hardly what to answer, yet I must own there is something in it
shocking to nature, and something very unkind to yourself. But, above
all, it is unkind to the child that is yet unborn, who, if we marry,
will come into the world with advantage enough, but if not, is ruined
before it is born; must bear the eternal reproach of what it is not
guilty of; must be branded from its cradle with a mark of infamy, be
loaded with the crimes and follies of its parents, and suffer for sins
that it never committed. This I take to be very hard, and, indeed, cruel
to the poor infant not yet born, who you cannot think of with any
patience, if you have the common affection of a mother, and not do that
for it which should at once place it on a level with the rest of the
world, and not leave it to curse its parents for what also we ought to
be ashamed of. I cannot, therefore," says he, "but beg and entreat you,
as you are a Christian and a mother, not to let the innocent lamb you go
with be ruined before it is born, and leave it to curse and reproach us
hereafter for what may be so easily avoided.

"Then, dear madam," said he, with a world of tenderness (and I thought I
saw tears in his eyes), "allow me to repeat it, that I am a Christian,
and consequently I do not allow what I have rashly, and without due
consideration, done; I say, I do not approve of it as lawful, and
therefore, though I did, with the view I have mentioned, one
unjustifiable action, I cannot say that I could satisfy myself to live
in a continual practice of what in judgment we must both condemn; and
though I love you above all the women in the world, and have done enough
to convince you of it by resolving to marry you after what has passed
between us, and by offering to quit all pretensions to any part of your
estate, so that I should, as it were, take a wife after I had lain with
her, and without a farthing portion, which, as my circumstances are, I
need not do; I say, notwithstanding my affection to you, which is
inexpressible, yet I cannot give up soul as well as body, the interest
of this world and the hopes of another; and you cannot call this my
disrespect to you."

If ever any man in the world was truly valuable for the strictest
honesty of intention, this was the man; and if ever woman in her senses
rejected a man of merit on so trivial and frivolous a pretence, I was
the woman; but surely it was the most preposterous thing that ever woman
did.

He would have taken me as a wife, but would not entertain me as a whore.
Was ever woman angry with any gentleman on that head? And was ever woman
so stupid to choose to be a whore, where she might have been an honest
wife? But infatuations are next to being possessed of the devil. I was
inflexible, and pretended to argue upon the point of a woman's liberty
as before, but he took me short, and with more warmth than he had yet
used with me, though with the utmost respect, replied, "Dear madam, you
argue for liberty, at the same time that you restrain yourself from that
liberty which God and nature has directed you to take, and, to supply
the deficiency, propose a vicious liberty, which is neither honourable
or religious. Will you propose liberty at the expense of modesty?"

I returned, that he mistook me; I did not propose it; I only said that
those that could not be content without concerning the sexes in that
affair might do so indeed; might entertain a man as men do a mistress,
if they thought fit, but he did not hear me say I would do so; and
though, by what had passed, he might well censure me in that part, yet
he should find, for the future, that I should freely converse with him
without any inclination that way.

He told me he could not promise that for himself, and thought he ought
not to trust himself with the opportunity, for that, as he had failed
already, he was loth to lead himself into the temptation of offending
again, and that this was the true reason of his resolving to go back to
Paris; not that he could willingly leave me, and would be very far from
wanting my invitation; but if he could not stay upon terms that became
him, either as an honest man or a Christian, what could he do? And he
hoped, he said, I could not blame him that he was unwilling anything
that was to call him father should upbraid him with leaving him in the
world to be called bastard; adding that he was astonished to think how I
could satisfy myself to be so cruel to an innocent infant not yet born;
professed he could neither bear the thoughts of it, much less bear to
see it, and hoped I would not take it ill that he could not stay to see
me delivered, for that very reason.

I saw he spoke this with a disturbed mind, and that it was with some
difficulty that he restrained his passion, so I declined any farther
discourse upon it; only said I hoped he would consider of it. "Oh,
madam!" says he, "do not bid me consider; 'tis for you to consider;" and
with that he went out of the room, in a strange kind of confusion, as
was easy to be seen in his countenance.

If I had not been one of the foolishest as well as wickedest creatures
upon earth, I could never have acted thus. I had one of the honestest,
completest gentlemen upon earth at my hand. He had in one sense saved my
life, but he had saved that life from ruin in a most remarkable manner.
He loved me even to distraction, and had come from Paris to Rotterdam on
purpose to seek me. He had offered me marriage even after I was with
child by him, and had offered to quit all his pretensions to my estate,
and give it up to my own management, having a plentiful estate of his
own. Here I might have settled myself out of the reach even of disaster
itself; his estate and mine would have purchased even then above two
thousand pounds a year, and I might have lived like a queen--nay, far
more happy than a queen; and, which was above all, I had now an
opportunity to have quitted a life of crime and debauchery, which I had
been given up to for several years, and to have sat down quiet in plenty
and honour, and to have set myself apart to the great work which I have
since seen so much necessity of and occasion for--I mean that of
repentance.

But my measure of wickedness was not yet full. I continued obstinate
against matrimony, and yet I could not bear the thoughts of his going
away neither. As to the child, I was not very anxious about it. I told
him I would promise him it should never come to him to upbraid him with
its being illegitimate; that if it was a boy, I would breed it up like
the son of a gentleman, and use it well for his sake; and after a little
more such talk as this, and seeing him resolved to go, I retired, but
could not help letting him see the tears run down my cheeks. He came to
me and kissed me, entreated me, conjured me by the kindness he had shown
me in my distress, by the justice he had done me in my bills and money
affairs, by the respect which made him refuse a thousand pistoles from
me for his expenses with that traitor the Jew, by the pledge of our
misfortunes--so he called it--which I carried with me, and by all that
the sincerest affection could propose to do, that I would not drive him
away.

But it would not do. I was stupid and senseless, deaf to all his
importunities, and continued so to the last. So we parted, only desiring
me to promise that I would write him word when I was delivered, and how
he might give me an answer; and this I engaged my word I would do. And
upon his desiring to be informed which way I intended to dispose of
myself, I told him I resolved to go directly to England, and to London,
where I proposed to lie in; but since he resolved to leave me, I told
him I supposed it would be of no consequence to him what became of me.

He lay in his lodgings that night, but went away early in the morning,
leaving me a letter in which he repeated all he had said, recommended
the care of the child, and desired of me that as he had remitted to me
the offer of a thousand pistoles which I would have given him for the
recompense of his charges and trouble with the Jew, and had given it me
back, so he desired I would allow him to oblige me to set apart that
thousand pistoles, with its improvement, for the child, and for its
education; earnestly pressing me to secure that little portion for the
abandoned orphan when I should think fit, as he was sure I would, to
throw away the rest upon something as worthless as my sincere friend at
Paris. He concluded with moving me to reflect, with the same regret as
he did, on our follies we had committed together; asked me forgiveness
for being the aggressor in the fact, and forgave me everything, he said,
but the cruelty of refusing him, which he owned he could not forgive me
so heartily as he should do, because he was satisfied it was an injury
to myself, would be an introduction to my ruin, and that I would
seriously repent of it. He foretold some fatal things which, he said, he
was well assured I should fall into, and that at last I would be ruined
by a bad husband; bid me be the more wary, that I might render him a
false prophet; but to remember that, if ever I came into distress, I had
a fast friend at Paris, who would not upbraid me with the unkind things
past, but would be always ready to return me good for evil.

This letter stunned me. I could not think it possible for any one that
had not dealt with the devil to write such a letter, for he spoke of
some particular things which afterwards were to befall me with such an
assurance that it frighted me beforehand; and when those things did come
to pass, I was persuaded he had some more than human knowledge. In a
word, his advices to me to repent were very affectionate, his warnings
of evil to happen to me were very kind, and his promises of assistance,
if I wanted him, were so generous that I have seldom seen the like; and
though I did not at first set much by that part because I looked upon
them as what might not happen, and as what was improbable to happen at
that time, yet all the rest of his letter was so moving that it left me
very melancholy, and I cried four-and-twenty hours after, almost without
ceasing, about it; and yet even all this while, whatever it was that
bewitched me, I had not one serious wish that I had taken him. I wished
heartily, indeed, that I could have kept him with me, but I had a mortal
aversion to marrying him, or indeed anybody else, but formed a thousand
wild notions in my head that I was yet gay enough, and young and
handsome enough, to please a man of quality, and that I would try my
fortune at London, come of it what would.

Thus blinded by my own vanity, I threw away the only opportunity I then
had to have effectually settled my fortunes, and secured them for this
world; and I am a memorial to all that shall read my story, a standing
monument of the madness and distraction which pride and infatuations
from hell run us into, how ill our passions guide us, and how
dangerously we act when we follow the dictates of an ambitious mind.

I was rich, beautiful, and agreeable, and not yet old. I had known
something of the influence I had had upon the fancies of men even of the
highest rank. I never forgot that the Prince de ---- had said, with an
ecstasy, that I was the finest woman in France. I knew I could make a
figure at London, and how well I could grace that figure. I was not at a
loss how to behave, and having already been adored by princes, I thought
of nothing less than of being mistress to the king himself. But I go
back to my immediate circumstances at that time.

I got over the absence of my honest merchant but slowly at first. It was
with infinite regret that I let him go at all; and when I read the
letter he left I was quite confounded. As soon as he was out of call
and irrecoverable I would have given half I had in the world for him
back again; my notion of things changed in an instant, and I called
myself a thousand fools for casting myself upon a life of scandal and
hazard, when, after the shipwreck of virtue, honour, and principle, and
sailing at the utmost risk in the stormy seas of crime and abominable
levity, I had a safe harbour presented, and no heart to cast anchor in
it.

His predictions terrified me; his promises of kindness if I came to
distress melted me into tears, but frighted me with the apprehensions of
ever coming into such distress, and filled my head with a thousand
anxieties and thoughts how it should be possible for me, who had now
such a fortune, to sink again into misery.

Then the dreadful scene of my life, when I was left with my five
children, &c., as I have related, represented itself again to me, and I
sat considering what measures I might take to bring myself to such a
state of desolation again, and how I should act to avoid it.

But these things wore off gradually. As to my friend the merchant, he
was gone, and gone irrecoverably, for I durst not follow him to Paris,
for the reasons mentioned above. Again, I was afraid to write to him to
return, lest he should have refused, as I verily believed he would; so
I sat and cried intolerably for some days--nay, I may say for some
weeks; but, I say, it wore off gradually, and as I had a pretty deal of
business for managing my effects, the hurry of that particular part
served to divert my thoughts, and in part to wear out the impressions
which had been made upon my mind.

I had sold my jewels, all but the diamond ring which my gentleman the
jeweller used to wear, and this, at proper times, I wore myself; as also
the diamond necklace which the prince had given me, and a pair of
extraordinary earrings worth about 600 pistoles; the other, which was a
fine casket, he left with me at his going to Versailles, and a small
case with some rubies and emeralds, &c. I say I sold them at the Hague
for 7600 pistoles. I had received all the bills which the merchant had
helped me to at Paris, and with the money I brought with me, they made
up 13,900 pistoles more; so that I had in ready money, and in account in
the bank at Amsterdam, above one-and-twenty thousand pistoles, besides
jewels; and how to get this treasure to England was my next care.

The business I had had now with a great many people for receiving such
large sums and selling jewels of such considerable value gave me
opportunity to know and converse with several of the best merchants of
the place, so that I wanted no direction now how to get my money
remitted to England. Applying, therefore, to several merchants, that I
might neither risk it all on the credit of one merchant, nor suffer any
single man to know the quantity of money I had; I say, applying myself
to several merchants, I got bills of exchange payable in London for all
my money. The first bills I took with me; the second bills I left in
trust (in case of any disaster at sea) in the hands of the first
merchant, him to whom I was recommended by my friend from Paris.

Having thus spent nine months in Holland, refused the best offer ever
woman in my circumstances had, parted unkindly, and indeed barbarously,
with the best friend and honestest man in the world, got all my money in
my pocket, and a bastard in my belly, I took shipping at the Brill in
the packet-boat, and arrived safe at Harwich, where my woman Amy was
come by my direction to meet me.

I would willingly have given ten thousand pounds of my money to have
been rid of the burthen I had in my belly, as above; but it could not
be, so I was obliged to bear with that part, and get rid of it by the
ordinary method of patience and a hard travail.

I was above the contemptible usage that women in my circumstances
oftentimes meet with. I had considered all that beforehand; and having
sent Amy beforehand, and remitted her money to do it, she had taken me
a very handsome house in ---- Street, near Charing Cross; had hired me
two maids and a footman, who she had put in a good livery; and having
hired a glass coach and four horses, she came with them and the
man-servant to Harwich to meet me, and had been there near a week before
I came, so I had nothing to do but to go away to London to my own house,
where I arrived in very good health, and where I passed for a French
lady, by the title of ----.

My first business was to get all my bills accepted, which, to cut the
story short, was all both accepted and currently paid; and I then
resolved to take me a country lodging somewhere near the town, to be
incognito, till I was brought to bed; which, appearing in such a figure
and having such an equipage, I easily managed without anybody's offering
the usual insults of parish inquiries. I did not appear in my new house
for some time, and afterwards I thought fit, for particular reasons, to
quit that house, and not to come to it at all, but take handsome large
apartments in the Pall Mall, in a house out of which was a private door
into the king's garden, by the permission of the chief gardener, who had
lived in the house.

I had now all my effects secured; but my money being my great concern at
that time, I found it a difficulty how to dispose of it so as to bring
me in an annual interest. However, in some time I got a substantial
safe mortgage for £14,000 by the assistance of the famous Sir Robert
Clayton, for which I had an estate of £1800 a year bound to me, and had
£700 per annum interest for it.

This, with some other securities, made me a very handsome estate of
above a thousand pounds a year; enough, one would think, to keep any
woman in England from being a whore.

I lay in at ----, about four miles from London, and brought a fine boy
into the world, and, according to my promise, sent an account of it to
my friend at Paris, the father of it; and in the letter told him how
sorry I was for his going away, and did as good as intimate that, if he
would come once more to see me, I should use him better than I had done.
He gave me a very kind and obliging answer, but took not the least
notice of what I had said of his coming over, so I found my interest
lost there for ever. He gave me joy of the child, and hinted that he
hoped I would make good what he had begged for the poor infant as I had
promised, and I sent him word again that I would fulfil his order to a
tittle; and such a fool and so weak I was in this last letter,
notwithstanding what I have said of his not taking notice of my
invitation, as to ask his pardon almost for the usage I gave him at
Rotterdam, and stooped so low as to expostulate with him for not taking
notice of my inviting him to come to me again, as I had done; and,
which was still more, went so far as to make a second sort of an offer
to him, telling him, almost in plain words, that if he would come over
now I would have him; but he never gave me the least reply to it at all,
which was as absolute a denial to me as he was ever able to give; so I
sat down, I cannot say contented, but vexed heartily that I had made the
offer at all, for he had, as I may say, his full revenge of me in
scorning to answer, and to let me twice ask that of him which he with so
much importunity begged of me before.

I was now up again, and soon came to my City lodging in the Pall Mall,
and here I began to make a figure suitable to my estate, which was very
great; and I shall give you an account of my equipage in a few words,
and of myself too.

I paid £60 a year for my new apartments, for I took them by the year;
but then they were handsome lodgings indeed, and very richly furnished.
I kept my own servants to clean and look after them, found my own
kitchen ware and firing. My equipage was handsome, but not very great; I
had a coach, a coachman, a footman, my woman Amy, who I now dressed like
a gentlewoman and made her my companion, and three maids; and thus I
lived for a time. I dressed to the height of every mode, went extremely
rich in clothes, and as for jewels, I wanted none. I gave a very good
livery, laced with silver, and as rich as anybody below the nobility
could be seen with; and thus I appeared, leaving the world to guess who
or what I was, without offering to put myself forward.

I walked sometimes in the Mall with my woman Amy, but I kept no company
and made no acquaintances, only made as gay a show as I was able to do,
and that upon all occasions. I found, however, the world was not
altogether so unconcerned about me as I seemed to be about them; and
first I understood that the neighbours began to be mighty inquisitive
about me, as who I was, and what my circumstances were.

Amy was the only person that could answer their curiosity or give any
account of me; and she, a tattling woman and a true gossip, took care to
do that with all the art that she was mistress of. She let them know
that I was the widow of a person of quality in France, that I was very
rich, that I came over hither to look after an estate that fell to me by
some of my relations who died here, that I was worth £40,000 all in my
own hands, and the like.

This was all wrong in Amy, and in me too, though we did not see it at
first, for this recommended me indeed to those sort of gentlemen they
call fortune-hunters, and who always besieged ladies, as they called
it--on purpose to take them prisoners, as I called it--that is to say,
to marry the women and have the spending of their money. But if I was
wrong in refusing the honourable proposals of the Dutch merchant, who
offered me the disposal of my whole estate, and had as much of his own
to maintain me with, I was right now in refusing those offers which came
generally from gentlemen of good families and good estates, but who,
living to the extent of them, were always needy and necessitous, and
wanted a sum of money to make themselves easy, as they call it--that is
to say, to pay off encumbrances, sisters' portions, and the like; and
then the woman is prisoner for life, and may live as they give her
leave. This life I had seen into clearly enough, and therefore I was not
to be catched that way. However, as I said, the reputation of my money
brought several of those sort of gentry about me, and they found means,
by one stratagem or other, to get access to my ladyship; but, in short,
I answered them well enough, that I lived single and was happy; that as
I had no occasion to change my condition for an estate, so I did not see
that by the best offer that any of them could make me I could mend my
fortune; that I might be honoured with titles indeed, and in time rank
on public occasions with the peeresses (I mention that because one that
offered at me was the eldest son of a peer), but that I was as well
without the title as long as I had the estate, and while I had £2000 a
year of my own I was happier than I could be in being prisoner of state
to a nobleman, for I took the ladies of that rank to be little better.

As I have mentioned Sir Robert Clayton, with whom I had the good fortune
to become acquainted, on account of the mortgage which he helped me to,
it is necessary to take notice that I had much advantage in my ordinary
affairs by his advice, and therefore I called it my good fortune; for as
he paid me so considerable an annual income as £700 a year, so I am to
acknowledge myself much a debtor, not only to the justice of his
dealings with me, but to the prudence and conduct which he guided me to,
by his advice, for the management of my estate. And as he found I was
not inclined to marry, he frequently took occasion to hint how soon I
might raise my fortune to a prodigious height if I would but order my
family economy so far within my revenue as to lay up every year
something to add to the capital.

I was convinced of the truth of what he said, and agreed to the
advantages of it. You are to take it as you go that Sir Robert supposed
by my own discourse, and especially by my woman Amy, that I had £2000 a
year income. He judged, as he said, by my way of living that I could not
spend above one thousand, and so, he added, I might prudently lay by
£1000 every year to add to the capital; and by adding every year the
additional interest or income of the money to the capital, he proved to
me that in ten years I should double the £1000 per annum that I laid by.
And he drew me out a table, as he called it, of the increase, for me to
judge by; and by which, he said, if the gentlemen of England would but
act so, every family of them would increase their fortunes to a great
degree, just as merchants do by trade; whereas now, says Sir Robert, by
the humour of living up to the extent of their fortunes, and rather
beyond, the gentlemen, says he, ay, and the nobility too, are almost all
of them borrowers, and all in necessitous circumstances.

As Sir Robert frequently visited me, and was (if I may say so from his
own mouth) very well pleased with my way of conversing with him, for he
knew nothing, not so much as guessed at what I had been; I say, as he
came often to see me, so he always entertained me with this scheme of
frugality; and one time he brought another paper, wherein he showed me,
much to the same purpose as the former, to what degree I should increase
my estate if I would come into his method of contracting my expenses;
and by this scheme of his, it appeared that, laying up a thousand pounds
a year, and every year adding the interest to it, I should in twelve
years' time have in bank one-and-twenty thousand and fifty-eight
pounds, after which I might lay up two thousand pounds a year.

I objected that I was a young woman, that I had been used to live
plentifully, and with a good appearance, and that I knew not how to be a
miser.

He told me that if I thought I had enough it was well, but that if I
desired to have more, this was the way; that in another twelve years I
should be too rich, so that I should not know what to do with it.

"Ay, sir," says I, "you are contriving how to make me a rich old woman,
but that won't answer my end; I had rather have £20,000 now than £60,000
when I am fifty years old."

"Then, madam," says he, "I suppose your honour has no children?"

"None, Sir Robert," said I, "but what are provided for." So I left him
in the dark as much as I found him. However, I considered his scheme
very well, though I said no more to him at that time, and I resolved,
though I would make a very good figure, I say I resolved to abate a
little of my expense, and draw in, live closer, and save something, if
not so much as he proposed to me. It was near the end of the year that
Sir Robert made this proposal to me, and when the year was up I went to
his house in the City, and there I told him I came to thank him for his
scheme of frugality; that I had been studying much upon it, and though I
had not been able to mortify myself so much as to lay up a thousand
pounds a year, yet, as I had not come to him for my interest
half-yearly, as was usual, I was now come to let him know that I had
resolved to lay up that seven hundred pounds a year, and never use a
penny of it, desiring him to help me to put it out to advantage.

Sir Robert, a man thoroughly versed in arts of improving money, but
thoroughly honest, said to me, "Madam, I am glad you approve of the
method that I proposed to you; but you have begun wrong; you should have
come for your interest at the half-year, and then you had had the money
to put out. Now you have lost half a year's interest of £350, which is
£9; for I had but 5 per cent, on the mortgage."

"Well, well, sir," says I, "can you put this out for me now?"

"Let it lie, madam," says he, "till the next year, and then I'll put out
your £1400 together, and in the meantime I'll pay you interest for the
£700." So he gave me his bill for the money, which he told me should be
no less than £6 per cent. Sir Robert Clayton's bill was what nobody
would refuse, so I thanked him and let it lie; and next year I did the
same, and the third year Sir Robert got me a good mortgage for £2200 at
£6 per cent interest. So I had £132 a year added to my income, which was
a very satisfying article.

But I return to my history. As I have said, I found that my measures
were all wrong; the posture I set up in exposed me to innumerable
visitors of the kind I have mentioned above. I was cried up for a vast
fortune, and one that Sir Robert Clayton managed for; and Sir Robert
Clayton was courted for me as much as I was for myself. But I had given
Sir Robert his cue. I had told him my opinion of matrimony, in just the
same terms as I had done my merchant, and he came into it presently. He
owned that my observation was just, and that if I valued my liberty, as
I knew my fortune, and that it was in my own hands, I was to blame if I
gave it away to any one.

But Sir Robert knew nothing of my design, that I aimed at being a kept
mistress, and to have a handsome maintenance; and that I was still for
getting money, and laying it up too, as much as he could desire me, only
by a worse way.

However, Sir Robert came seriously to me one day, and told me he had an
offer of matrimony to make to me that was beyond all that he had heard
had offered themselves, and this was a merchant. Sir Robert and I agreed
exactly in our notions of a merchant. Sir Robert said, and I found it to
be true, that a true-bred merchant is the best gentleman in the nation;
that in knowledge, in manners, in judgment of things, the merchant
outdid many of the nobility; that having once mastered the world, and
being above the demand of business, though no real estate, they were
then superior to most gentlemen, even in estate; that a merchant in
flush business and a capital stock is able to spend more money than a
gentleman of £5000 a year estate; that while a merchant spent, he only
spent what he got, and not that, and that he laid up great sums every
year; that an estate is a pond, but that a trade was a spring; that if
the first is once mortgaged, it seldom gets clear, but embarrassed the
person for ever; but the merchant had his estate continually flowing;
and upon this he named me merchants who lived in more real splendour and
spent more money than most of the noblemen in England could singly
expend, and that they still grew immensely rich.

He went on to tell me that even the tradesmen in London, speaking of the
better sort of trades, could spend more money in their families, and yet
give better fortunes to their children, than, generally speaking, the
gentry of England from £1000 a year downward could do, and yet grow rich
too.

The upshot of all this was to recommend to me rather the bestowing my
fortune upon some eminent merchant, who lived already in the first
figure of a merchant, and who, not being in want or scarcity of money,
but having a flourishing business and a flowing cash, would at the first
word settle all my fortune on myself and children, and maintain me like
a queen.

This was certainly right, and had I taken his advice, I had been really
happy; but my heart was bent upon an independency of fortune, and I told
him I knew no state of matrimony but what was at best a state of
inferiority, if not of bondage; that I had no notion of it; that I lived
a life of absolute liberty now, was free as I was born, and having a
plentiful fortune, I did not understand what coherence the words "honour
and obey" had with the liberty of a free woman; that I knew no reason
the men had to engross the whole liberty of the race, and make the
woman, notwithstanding any disparity of fortune, be subject to the laws
of marriage, of their own making; that it was my misfortune to be a
woman, but I was resolved it should not be made worse by the sex; and,
seeing liberty seemed to be the men's property, I would be a man-woman,
for, as I was born free, I would die so.

Sir Robert smiled, and told me I talked a kind of Amazonian language;
that he found few women of my mind, or that, if they were, they wanted
resolution to go on with it; that, notwithstanding all my notions, which
he could not but say had once some weight in them, yet he understood I
had broke in upon them, and had been married. I answered, I had so; but
he did not hear me say that I had any encouragement from what was past
to make a second venture; that I was got well out of the toil, and if I
came in again I should have nobody to blame but myself.

Sir Robert laughed heartily at me, but gave over offering any more
arguments, only told me he had pointed me out for some of the best
merchants in London, but since I forbade him he would give me no
disturbance of that kind. He applauded my way of managing my money, and
told me I should soon be monstrous rich; but he neither knew or
mistrusted that, with all this wealth, I was yet a whore, and was not
averse to adding to my estate at the farther expense of my virtue.

But to go on with my story as to my way of living. I found, as above,
that my living as I did would not answer; that it only brought the
fortune-hunters and bites about me, as I have said before, to make a
prey of me and my money; and, in short, I was harassed with lovers,
beaux, and fops of quality, in abundance, but it would not do. I aimed
at other things, and was possessed with so vain an opinion of my own
beauty, that nothing less than the king himself was in my eye. And this
vanity was raised by some words let fall by a person I conversed with,
who was, perhaps, likely enough to have brought such a thing to pass,
had it been sooner; but that game began to be pretty well over at
court. However, the having mentioned such a thing, it seems a little
too publicly, it brought abundance of people about me, upon a wicked
account too.

And now I began to act in a new sphere. The court was exceedingly gay
and fine, though fuller of men than of women, the queen not affecting to
be very much in public. On the other hand, it is no slander upon the
courtiers to say, they were as wicked as anybody in reason could desire
them. The king had several mistresses, who were prodigious fine, and
there was a glorious show on that side indeed. If the sovereign gave
himself a loose, it could not be expected the rest of the court should
be all saints; so far was it from that, though I would not make it worse
than it was, that a woman that had anything agreeable in her appearance
could never want followers.

I soon found myself thronged with admirers, and I received visits from
some persons of very great figure, who always introduced themselves by
the help of an old lady or two who were now become my intimates; and one
of them, I understood afterwards, was set to work on purpose to get into
my favour, in order to introduce what followed.

The conversation we had was generally courtly, but civil. At length some
gentlemen proposed to play, and made what they called a party. This, it
seems, was a contrivance of one of my female hangers-on, for, as I
said, I had two of them, who thought this was the way to introduce
people as often as she pleased; and so indeed it was. They played high
and stayed late, but begged my pardon, only asked leave to make an
appointment for the next night. I was as gay and as well pleased as any
of them, and one night told one of the gentlemen, my Lord ----, that
seeing they were doing me the honour of diverting themselves at my
apartment, and desired to be there sometimes, I did not keep a
gaming-table, but I would give them a little ball the next day if they
pleased, which they accepted very willingly.

Accordingly, in the evening the gentlemen began to come, where I let
them see that I understood very well what such things meant. I had a
large dining-room in my apartments, with five other rooms on the same
floor, all which I made drawing-rooms for the occasion, having all the
beds taken down for the day. In three of these I had tables placed,
covered with wine and sweetmeats, the fourth had a green table for play,
and the fifth was my own room, where I sat, and where I received all the
company that came to pay their compliments to me. I was dressed, you may
be sure, to all the advantage possible, and had all the jewels on that I
was mistress of. My Lord ----, to whom I had made the invitation, sent me
a set of fine music from the playhouse, and the ladies danced, and we
began to be very merry, when about eleven o'clock I had notice given me
that there were some gentlemen coming in masquerade. I seemed a little
surprised, and began to apprehend some disturbance, when my Lord ----
perceiving it, spoke to me to be easy, for that there was a party of the
guards at the door which should be ready to prevent any rudeness; and
another gentleman gave me a hint as if the king was among the masks. I
coloured as red as blood itself could make a face look, and expressed a
great surprise; however, there was no going back, so I kept my station
in my drawing-room, but with the folding-doors wide open.

A while after the masks came in, and began with a dance _à la comique_,
performing wonderfully indeed. While they were dancing I withdrew, and
left a lady to answer for me that I would return immediately. In less
than half-an-hour I returned, dressed in the habit of a Turkish
princess; the habit I got at Leghorn, when my foreign prince bought me a
Turkish slave, as I have said. The Maltese man-of-war had, it seems,
taken a Turkish vessel going from Constantinople to Alexandria, in which
were some ladies bound for Grand Cairo in Egypt; and as the ladies were
made slaves, so their fine clothes were thus exposed; and with this
Turkish slave I bought the rich clothes too. The dress was
extraordinary fine indeed; I had bought it as a curiosity, having never
seen the like. The robe was a fine Persian or India damask, the ground
white, and the flowers blue and gold, and the train held five yards. The
dress under it was a vest of the same, embroidered with gold, and set
with some pearl in the work and some turquoise stones. To the vest was a
girdle five or six inches wide, after the Turkish mode; and on both ends
where it joined, or hooked, was set with diamonds for eight inches
either way, only they were not true diamonds, but nobody knew that but
myself.

The turban, or head-dress, had a pinnacle on the top, but not above five
inches, with a piece of loose sarcenet hanging from it; and on the
front, just over the forehead, was a good jewel which I had added to it.

This habit, as above, cost me about sixty pistoles in Italy, but cost
much more in the country from whence it came; and little did I think
when I bought it that I should put it to such a use as this, though I
had dressed myself in it many times by the help of my little Turk, and
afterwards between Amy and I, only to see how I looked in it. I had sent
her up before to get it ready, and when I came up I had nothing to do
but slip it on, and was down in my drawing-room in a little more than a
quarter of an hour. When I came there the room was full of company; but
I ordered the folding-doors to be shut for a minute or two till I had
received the compliments of the ladies that were in the room, and had
given them a full view of my dress.

But my Lord ----, who happened to be in the room, slipped out at another
door, and brought back with him one of the masks, a tall, well-shaped
person, but who had no name, being all masked; nor would it have been
allowed to ask any person's name on such an occasion. The person spoke
in French to me, that it was the finest dress he had ever seen, and
asked me if he should have the honour to dance with me. I bowed, as
giving my consent, but said, as I had been a Mahometan, I could not
dance after the manner of this country; I supposed their music would not
play _à la Moresque_. He answered merrily. I had a Christian's face, and
he'd venture it that I could dance like a Christian; adding that so much
beauty could not be Mahometan. Immediately the folding-doors were flung
open, and he led me into the room. The company were under the greatest
surprise imaginable; the very music stopped awhile to gaze, for the
dress was indeed exceedingly surprising, perfectly new, very agreeable,
and wonderful rich.

The gentleman, whoever he was, for I never knew, led me only _à
courant_, and then asked me if I had a mind to dance an antic--that is
to say, whether I would dance the antic as they had danced in
masquerade, or anything by myself. I told him anything else rather, if
he pleased; so we danced only two French dances, and he led me to the
drawing-room door, when he retired to the rest of the masks. When he
left me at the drawing-room door I did not go in, as he thought I would
have done, but turned about and showed myself to the whole room, and
calling my woman to me, gave her some directions to the music, by which
the company presently understood that I would give them a dance by
myself. Immediately all the house rose up and paid me a kind of a
compliment by removing back every way to make me room, for the place was
exceedingly full. The music did not at first hit the tune that I
directed, which was a French tune, so I was forced to send my woman to
them again, standing all this while at my drawing-room door; but as soon
as my woman spoke to them again, they played it right, and I, to let
them see it was so, stepped forward to the middle of the room. Then they
began it again, and I danced by myself a figure which I learnt in
France, when the Prince de ---- desired I would dance for his diversion.
It was, indeed, a very fine figure, invented by a famous master at
Paris, for a lady or a gentleman to dance single; but being perfectly
new, it pleased the company exceedingly, and they all thought it had
been Turkish; nay, one gentleman had the folly to expose himself so
much as to say, and I think swore too, that he had seen it danced at
Constantinople, which was ridiculous enough.

At the finishing the dance the company clapped, and almost shouted; and
one of the gentlemen cried out "Roxana! Roxana! by ----," with an oath;
upon which foolish accident I had the name of Roxana presently fixed
upon me all over the court end of town as effectually as if I had been
christened Roxana. I had, it seems, the felicity of pleasing everybody
that night to an extreme; and my ball, but especially my dress, was the
chat of the town for that week; and so the name of Roxana was the toast
at and about the court; no other health was to be named with it.

Now things began to work as I would have them, and I began to be very
popular, as much as I could desire. The ball held till (as well as I was
pleased with the show) I was sick of the night; the gentlemen masked
went off about three o'clock in the morning, the other gentlemen sat
down to play; the music held it out, and some of the ladies were dancing
at six in the morning.

But I was mighty eager to know who it was danced with me. Some of the
lords went so far as to tell me I was very much honoured in my company;
one of them spoke so broad as almost to say it was the king, but I was
convinced afterwards it was not; and another replied if he had been his
Majesty he should have thought it no dishonour to lead up a Roxana; but
to this hour I never knew positively who it was; and by his behaviour I
thought he was too young, his Majesty being at that time in an age that
might be discovered from a young person, even in his dancing.

Be that as it would, I had five hundred guineas sent me the next
morning, and the messenger was ordered to tell me that the persons who
sent it desired a ball again at my lodgings on the next Tuesday, but
that they would have my leave to give the entertainment themselves. I
was mighty well pleased with this, to be sure, but very inquisitive to
know who the money came from; but the messenger was silent as death as
to that point, and bowing always at my inquiries, begged me to ask no
questions which he could not give an obliging answer to.

I forgot to mention, that the gentlemen that played gave a hundred
guineas to the box, as they called it, and at the end of their play they
asked for my gentlewoman of the bedchamber, as they called her (Mrs.
Amy, forsooth), and gave it her, and gave twenty guineas more among the
servants.

These magnificent doings equally both pleased and surprised me, and I
hardly knew where I was; but especially that notion of the king being
the person that danced with me, puffed me up to that degree, that I not
only did not know anybody else, but indeed was very far from knowing
myself.

I had now, the next Tuesday, to provide for the like company. But, alas!
it was all taken out of my hand. Three gentlemen, who yet were, it
seems, but servants, came on the Saturday, and bringing sufficient
testimonies that they were right, for one was the same who brought the
five hundred guineas; I say, three of them came, and brought bottles of
all sorts of wines, and hampers of sweetmeats to such a quantity, it
appeared they designed to hold the trade on more than once, and that
they would furnish everything to a profusion.

However, as I found a deficiency in two things, I made provision of
about twelve dozen of fine damask napkins, with tablecloths of the same,
sufficient to cover all the tables, with three tablecloths upon every
table, and sideboards in proportion. Also I bought a handsome quantity
of plate, necessary to have served all the sideboards; but the gentlemen
would not suffer any of it to be used, telling me they had bought fine
china dishes and plates for the whole service, and that in such public
places they could not be answerable for the plate. So it was set all up
in a large glass cupboard in the room I sat in, where it made a very
good show indeed.

On Tuesday there came such an appearance of gentlemen and ladies, that
my apartments were by no means able to receive them, and those who in
particular appeared as principals gave order below to let no more
company come up. The street was full of coaches with coronets, and fine
glass chairs, and, in short, it was impossible to receive the company. I
kept my little room as before, and the dancers filled the great room;
all the drawing-rooms also were filled, and three rooms below stairs,
which were not mine.

It was very well that there was a strong party of the guards brought to
keep the door, for without that there had been such a promiscuous crowd,
and some of them scandalous too, that we should have been all disorder
and confusion; but the three head servants managed all that, and had a
word to admit all the company by.

It was uncertain to me, and is to this day, who it was that danced with
me the Wednesday before, when the ball was my own; but that the king was
at this assembly was out of question with me, by circumstances that, I
suppose, I could not be deceived in, and particularly that there were
five persons who were not masked; three of them had blue garters, and
they appeared not to me till I came out to dance.

This meeting was managed just as the first, though with much more
magnificence, because of the company. I placed myself (exceedingly rich
in clothes and jewels) in the middle of my little room, as before, and
made my compliment to all the company as they passed me, as I did
before. But my Lord ----, who had spoken openly to me the first night,
came to me, and, unmasking, told me the company had ordered him to tell
me they hoped they should see me in the dress I had appeared in the
first day, which had been so acceptable that it had been the occasion of
this new meeting. "And, madam," says he, "there are some in this
assembly who it is worth your while to oblige."

I bowed to my Lord ----, and immediately withdrew. While I was above,
a-dressing in my new habit, two ladies, perfectly unknown to me, were
conveyed into my apartment below, by the order of a noble person, who,
with his family, had been in Persia; and here, indeed, I thought I
should have been outdone, or perhaps balked.

One of these ladies was dressed most exquisitely fine indeed, in the
habit of a virgin lady of quality of Georgia, and the other in the same
habit of Armenia, with each of them a woman slave to attend them.

The ladies had their petticoats short to their ankles, but plaited all
round, and before them short aprons, but of the finest point that could
be seen. Their gowns were made with long antique sleeves hanging down
behind, and a train let down. They had no jewels, but their heads and
breasts were dressed up with flowers, and they both came in veiled.

Their slaves were bareheaded, but their long, black hair was braided in
locks hanging down behind to their waists, and tied up with ribands.
They were dressed exceeding rich, and were as beautiful as their
mistresses; for none of them had any masks on. They waited in my room
till I came down, and all paid their respects to me after the Persian
manner, and sat down on a safra--that is to say, almost crosslegged, on
a couch made up of cushions laid on the ground.

This was admirably fine, and I was indeed startled at it. They made
their compliment to me in French, and I replied in the same language.
When the doors were opened, they walked into the dancing-room, and
danced such a dance as indeed nobody there had ever seen, and to an
instrument like a guitar, with a small low-sounding trumpet, which
indeed was very fine, and which my Lord ---- had provided.

They danced three times all alone, for nobody indeed could dance with
them. The novelty pleased, truly, but yet there was something wild and
_bizarre_ in it, because they really acted to the life the barbarous
country whence they came; but as mine had the French behaviour under the
Mahometan dress, it was every way as new, and pleased much better
indeed.

As soon as they had shown their Georgian and Armenian shapes, and
danced, as I have said, three times, they withdrew, paid their
compliment to me (for I was queen of the day), and went off to undress.

Some gentlemen then danced with ladies all in masks; and when they
stopped, nobody rose up to dance, but all called out "Roxana, Roxana."
In the interval, my Lord ---- had brought another masked person into my
room, who I knew not, only that I could discern it was not the same
person that led me out before. This noble person (for I afterwards
understood it was the Duke of ----), after a short compliment, led me
out into the middle of the room.

I was dressed in the same vest and girdle as before, but the robe had a
mantle over it, which is usual in the Turkish habit, and it was of
crimson and green, the green brocaded with gold; and my tyhiaai, or
head-dress, varied a little from that I had before, as it stood higher,
and had some jewels about the rising part, which made it look like a
turban crowned.

I had no mask, neither did I paint, and yet I had the day of all the
ladies that appeared at the ball, I mean of those that appeared with
faces on. As for those masked, nothing could be said of them, no doubt
there might be many finer than I was; it must be confessed that the
habit was infinitely advantageous to me, and everybody looked at me with
a kind of pleasure, which gave me great advantage too.

After I had danced with that noble person, I did not offer to dance by
myself, as I had before; but they all called out "Roxana" again; and two
of the gentlemen came into the drawing-room to entreat me to give them
the Turkish dance, which I yielded to readily, so I came out and danced
just as at first.

While I was dancing, I perceived five persons standing all together, and
among them only one with his hat on. It was an immediate hint to me who
it was, and had at first almost put me into some disorder; but I went
on, received the applause of the house, as before, and retired into my
own room. When I was there, the five gentlemen came across the room to
my side, and, coming in, followed by a throng of great persons, the
person with his hat on said, "Madam Roxana, you perform to admiration."
I was prepared, and offered to kneel to kiss his hand, but he declined
it, and saluted me, and so, passing back again through the great room,
went away.

I do not say here who this was, but I say I came afterwards to know
something more plainly. I would have withdrawn, and disrobed, being
somewhat too thin in that dress, unlaced and open-breasted, as if I had
been in my shift; but it could not be, and I was obliged to dance
afterwards with six or eight gentlemen most, if not all of them, of the
first rank; and I was told afterwards that one of them was the Duke of
M[onmou]th.

About two or three o'clock in the morning the company began to decrease;
the number of women especially dropped away home, some and some at a
time; and the gentlemen retired downstairs, where they unmasked and went
to play.

Amy waited at the room where they played, sat up all night to attend
them, and in the morning when they broke up they swept the box into her
lap, when she counted out to me sixty-two guineas and a half; and the
other servants got very well too. Amy came to me when they were all
gone; "Law, madam," says Amy, with a long gaping cry, "what shall I do
with all this money?" And indeed the poor creature was half mad with
joy.

I was now in my element. I was as much talked of as anybody could
desire, and I did not doubt but something or other would come of it; but
the report of my being so rich rather was a balk to my view than
anything else; for the gentlemen that would perhaps have been
troublesome enough otherwise, seemed to be kept off, for Roxana was too
high for them.

There is a scene which came in here which I must cover from human eyes
or ears. For three years and about a month Roxana lived retired, having
been obliged to make an excursion in a manner, and with a person which
duty and private vows obliges her not to reveal, at least not yet.

At the end of this time I appeared again; but, I must add, that as I had
in this time of retreat made hay, &c., so I did not come abroad again
with the same lustre, or shine with so much advantage as before. For as
some people had got at least a suspicion of where I had been, and who
had had me all the while, it began to be public that Roxana was, in
short, a mere Roxana, neither better nor worse, and not that woman of
honour and virtue that was at first supposed.

You are now to suppose me about seven years come to town, and that I had
not only suffered the old revenue, which I hinted was managed by Sir
Robert Clayton, to grow, as was mentioned before, but I had laid up an
incredible wealth, the time considered; and had I yet had the least
thought of reforming, I had all the opportunity to do it with advantage
that ever woman had. For the common vice of all whores, I mean money,
was out of the question, nay, even avarice itself seemed to be glutted;
for, including what I had saved in reserving the interest of £14,000,
which, as above, I had left to grow, and including some very good
presents I had made to me in mere compliment upon these shining
masquerading meetings, which I held up for about two years, and what I
made of three years of the most glorious retreat, as I call it, that
ever woman had, I had fully doubled my first substance, and had near
£5000 in money which I kept at home, besides abundance of plate and
jewels, which I had either given me or had bought to set myself out for
public days.

In a word, I had now five-and-thirty thousand pounds estate; and as I
found ways to live without wasting either principal or interest, I laid
up £2000 every year at least out of the mere interest, adding it to the
principal, and thus I went on.

After the end of what I call my retreat, and out of which I brought a
great deal of money, I appeared again, but I seemed like an old piece of
plate that had been hoarded up some years, and comes out tarnished and
discoloured; so I came out blown, and looked like a cast-off mistress;
nor, indeed, was I any better, though I was not at all impaired in
beauty except that I was a little fatter than I was formerly, and always
granting that I was four years older.

However, I preserved the youth of my temper, was always bright, pleasant
in company, and agreeable to everybody, or else everybody flattered me;
and in this condition I came abroad to the world again. And though I was
not so popular as before, and indeed did not seek it, because I knew it
could not be, yet I was far from being without company, and that of the
greatest quality (of subjects I mean), who frequently visited me, and
sometimes we had meetings for mirth and play at my apartments, where I
failed not to divert them in the most agreeable manner possible.

Nor could any of them make the least particular application to me, from
the notion they had of my excessive wealth, which, as they thought,
placed me above the meanness of a maintenance, and so left no room to
come easily about me.

But at last I was very handsomely attacked by a person of honour, and
(which recommended him particularly to me) a person of a very great
estate. He made a long introduction to me upon the subject of my wealth.
"Ignorant creature!" said I to myself, considering him as a lord, "was
there ever woman in the world that could stoop to the baseness of being
a whore, and was above taking the reward of her vice! No, no, depend
upon it, if your lordship obtains anything of me, you must pay for it;
and the notion of my being so rich serves only to make it cost you the
dearer, seeing you cannot offer a small matter to a woman of £2000 a
year estate."

After he had harangued upon that subject a good while, and had assured
me he had no design upon me, that he did not come to make a prize of me,
or to pick my pocket, which, by the way, I was in no fear of, for I took
too much care of my money to part with any of it that way, he then
turned his discourse to the subject of love, a point so ridiculous to me
without the main thing, I mean the money, that I had no patience to hear
him make so long a story of it.

I received him civilly, and let him see I could bear to hear a wicked
proposal without being affronted, and yet I was not to be brought into
it too easily. He visited me a long while, and, in short, courted me as
closely and assiduously as if he had been wooing me to matrimony. He
made me several valuable presents, which I suffered myself to be
prevailed with to accept, but not without great difficulty.

Gradually I suffered also his other importunities; and when he made a
proposal of a compliment or appointment to me for a settlement, he said
that though I was rich, yet there was not the less due from him to
acknowledge the favours he received; and that if I was to be his I
should not live at my own expense, cost what it would. I told him I was
far from being extravagant, and yet I did not live at the expense of
less than £500 a year out of my own pocket; that, however, I was not
covetous of settled allowances, for I looked upon that as a kind of
golden chain, something like matrimony; that though I knew how to be
true to a man of honour, as I knew his lordship to be, yet I had a kind
of aversion to the bonds; and though I was not so rich as the world
talked me up to be, yet I was not so poor as to bind myself to hardships
for a pension.

He told me he expected to make my life perfectly easy, and intended it
so; that he knew of no bondage there could be in a private engagement
between us; that the bonds of honour he knew I would be tied by, and
think them no burthen; and for other obligations, he scorned to expect
anything from me but what he knew as a woman of honour I could grant.
Then as to maintenance, he told me he would soon show me that he valued
me infinitely above £500 a year, and upon this foot we began.

I seemed kinder to him after this discourse, and as time and private
conversation made us very intimate, we began to come nearer to the main
article, namely, the £500 a year. He offered that at first word, and to
acknowledge it as an infinite favour to have it be accepted of; and I,
that thought it was too much by all the money, suffered myself to be
mastered, or prevailed with to yield, even on but a bare engagement upon
parole.

When he had obtained his end that way, I told him my mind. "Now you
see, my lord," said I, "how weakly I have acted, namely, to yield to you
without any capitulation, or anything secured to me but that which you
may cease to allow when you please. If I am the less valued for such a
confidence, I shall be injured in a manner that I will endeavour not to
deserve."

He told me that he would make it evident to me that he did not seek me
by way of bargain, as such things were often done; that as I had treated
him with a generous confidence, so I should find I was in the hands of a
man of honour, and one that knew how to value the obligation; and upon
this he pulled out a goldsmith's bill for £300, which (putting it into
my hand), he said, he gave me as a pledge that I should not be a loser
by my not having made a bargain with him.

This was engaging indeed, and gave me a good idea of our future
correspondence; and, in short, as I could not refrain treating him with
more kindness than I had done before, so one thing begetting another, I
gave him several testimonies that I was entirely his own by inclination
as well as by the common obligation of a mistress, and this pleased him
exceedingly.

Soon after this private engagement I began to consider whether it were
not more suitable to the manner of life I now led to be a little less
public; and, as I told my lord, it would rid me of the importunities of
others, and of continual visits from a sort of people who he knew of,
and who, by the way, having now got the notion of me which I really
deserved, began to talk of the old game, love and gallantry, and to
offer at what was rude enough--things as nauseous to me now as if I had
been married and as virtuous as other people. The visits of these people
began indeed to be uneasy to me, and particularly as they were always
very tedious and impertinent; nor could my Lord ---- be pleased with
them at all if they had gone on. It would be diverting to set down here
in what manner I repulsed these sort of people; how in some I resented
it as an affront, and told them that I was sorry they should oblige me
to vindicate myself from the scandal of such suggestions by telling them
that I could see them no more, and by desiring them not to give
themselves the trouble of visiting me, who, though I was not willing to
be uncivil, yet thought myself obliged never to receive any visit from
any gentleman after he had made such proposals as those to me. But these
things would be too tedious to bring in here. It was on this account I
proposed to his lordship my taking new lodgings for privacy; besides, I
considered that as I might live very handsomely, and yet not so
publicly, so I needed not spend so much money by a great deal; and if I
made £500 a year of this generous person, it was more than I had any
occasion to spend by a great deal.

My lord came readily into this proposal, and went further than I
expected, for he found out a lodging for me in a very handsome house,
where yet he was not known--I suppose he had employed somebody to find
it out for him--and where he had a convenient way to come into the
garden by a door that opened into the park, a thing very rarely allowed
in those times.

By this key he could come in at what time of night or day he pleased;
and as we had also a little door in the lower part of the house which
was always left upon a lock, and his was the master-key, so if it was
twelve, one, or two o'clock at night, he could come directly into my
bedchamber. _N.B._--I was not afraid I should be found abed with anybody
else, for, in a word, I conversed with nobody at all.

It happened pleasantly enough one night, his lordship had stayed late,
and I, not expecting him that night, had taken Amy to bed with me, and
when my lord came into the chamber we were both fast asleep. I think it
was near three o'clock when he came in, and a little merry, but not at
all fuddled or what they call in drink; and he came at once into the
room.

Amy was frighted out of her wits, and cried out. I said calmly, "Indeed,
my lord, I did not expect you to-night, and we have been a little
frighted to-night with fire." "Oh!" says he, "I see you have got a
bedfellow with you." I began to make an apology. "No, no," says my lord,
"you need no excuse, 'tis not a man bedfellow, I see;" but then, talking
merrily enough, he catched his words back: "But, hark ye," says he, "now
I think on 't, how shall I be satisfied it is not a man bedfellow?"
"Oh," says I, "I dare say your lordship is satisfied 'tis poor Amy."
"Yes," says he, "'tis Mrs. Amy; but how do I know what Amy is? it may be
Mr. Amy for aught I know; I hope you'll give me leave to be satisfied."
I told him, yes, by all means, I would have his lordship satisfied; but
I supposed he knew who she was.

Well, he fell foul of poor Amy, and indeed I thought once he would have
carried the jest on before my face, as was once done in a like case; but
his lordship was not so hot neither, but he would know whether Amy was
Mr. Amy or Mrs. Amy, and so, I suppose, he did; and then being satisfied
in that doubtful case, he walked to the farther end of the room, and
went into a little closet and sat down.

In the meantime Amy and I got up, and I bid her run and make the bed in
another chamber for my lord, and I gave her sheets to put into it; which
she did immediately, and I put my lord to bed there, and when I had
done, at his desire went to bed to him. I was backward at first to come
to bed to him, and made my excuse because I had been in bed with Amy,
and had not shifted me; but he was past those niceties at that time; and
as long as he was sure it was Mrs. Amy, and not Mr. Amy, he was very
well satisfied, and so the jest passed over. But Amy appeared no more
all that night, or the next day, and when she did, my lord was so merry
with her upon his eclaircissement, as he called it, that Amy did not
know what to do with herself.

Not that Amy was such a nice lady in the main, if she had been fairly
dealt with, as has appeared in the former part of this work; but now she
was surprised, and a little hurried, that she scarce knew where she was;
and besides, she was, as to his lordship, as nice a lady as any in the
world, and for anything he knew of her she appeared as such. The rest
was to us only that knew of it.

I held this wicked scene of life out eight years, reckoning from my
first coming to England; and though my lord found no fault, yet I found,
without much examining, that any one who looked in my face might see I
was above twenty years old; and yet, without flattering myself, I
carried my age, which was above fifty, very well too.

I may venture to say that no woman ever lived a life like me, of
six-and-twenty years of wickedness, without the least signals of
remorse, without any signs of repentance, or without so much as a wish
to put an end to it; I had so long habituated myself to a life of vice,
that really it appeared to be no vice to me. I went on smooth and
pleasant, I wallowed in wealth, and it flowed in upon me at such a rate,
having taken the frugal measures that the good knight directed, so that
I had at the end of the eight years two thousand eight hundred pounds
coming yearly in, of which I did not spend one penny, being maintained
by my allowance from my Lord ----, and more than maintained by above
£200 per annum; for though he did not contract for £500 a year, as I
made dumb signs to have it be, yet he gave me money so often, and that
in such large parcels, that I had seldom so little as seven to eight
hundred pounds a year of him, one year with another.

[Illustration: THE DUTCH MERCHANT CALLS ON ROXANA

_"There," says she (ushering him in), "is the person who, I suppose,
thou inquirest for"_

PAGE 338]

I must go back here, after telling openly the wicked things I did, to
mention something which, however, had the face of doing good. I
remembered that when I went from England, which was fifteen years
before, I had left five little children, turned out as it were to the
wide world, and to the charity of their father's relations; the eldest
was not six years old, for we had not been married full seven years when
their father went away.

After my coming to England I was greatly desirous to hear how things
stood with them, and whether they were all alive or not, and in what
manner they had been maintained; and yet I resolved not to discover
myself to them in the least, or to let any of the people that had the
breeding of them up know that there was such a body left in the world as
their mother.

Amy was the only body I could trust with such a commission, and I sent
her into Spitalfields, to the old aunt and to the poor woman that were
so instrumental in disposing the relations to take some care of the
children, but they were both gone, dead and buried some years. The next
inquiry she made was at the house where she carried the poor children,
and turned them in at the door. When she came there she found the house
inhabited by other people, so that she could make little or nothing of
her inquiries, and came back with an answer that indeed was no answer to
me, for it gave me no satisfaction at all. I sent her back to inquire in
the neighbourhood what was become of the family that lived in that
house; and if they were removed, where they lived, and what
circumstances they were in; and, withal, if she could, what became of
the poor children, and how they lived, and where; how they had been
treated; and the like.

She brought me back word upon this second going, that she heard, as to
the family, that the husband, who, though but uncle-in-law to the
children, had yet been kindest to them, was dead; and that the widow was
left but in mean circumstances--that is to say, she did not want, but
that she was not so well in the world as she was thought to be when her
husband was alive; that, as to the poor children, two of them, it seems,
had been kept by her, that is to say, by her husband, while he lived,
for that it was against her will, that we all knew; but the honest
neighbours pitied the poor children, they said, heartily; for that their
aunt used them barbarously, and made them little better than servants in
the house to wait upon her and her children, and scarce allowed them
clothes fit to wear.

These were, it seems, my eldest and third, which were daughters; the
second was a son, the fourth a daughter, and the youngest a son.

To finish the melancholy part of this history of my two unhappy girls,
she brought me word that as soon as they were able to go out and get any
work they went from her, and some said she had turned them out of doors;
but it seems she had not done so, but she used them so cruelly that they
left her, and one of them went to service to a neighbour's, a little way
off, who knew her, an honest, substantial weaver's wife, to whom she was
chambermaid, and in a little time she took her sister out of the
Bridewell of her aunt's house, and got her a place too.

This was all melancholy and dull. I sent her then to the weaver's house,
where the eldest had lived, but found that, her mistress being dead, she
was gone, and nobody knew there whither she went, only that they heard
she had lived with a great lady at the other end of the town; but they
did not know who that lady was.

These inquiries took us up three or four weeks, and I was not one jot
the better for it, for I could hear nothing to my satisfaction. I sent
her next to find out the honest man who, as in the beginning of my story
I observed, made them be entertained, and caused the youngest to be
fetched from the town where we lived, and where the parish officers had
taken care of him. This gentleman was still alive; and there she heard
that my youngest daughter and eldest son was dead also; but that my
youngest son was alive, and was at that time about seventeen years old,
and that he was put out apprentice by the kindness and charity of his
uncle, but to a mean trade, and at which he was obliged to work very
hard.

Amy was so curious in this part that she went immediately to see him,
and found him all dirty and hard at work. She had no remembrance at all
of the youth, for she had not seen him since he was about two years old;
and it was evident he could have no knowledge of her.

However, she talked with him, and found him a good, sensible, mannerly
youth; that he knew little of the story of his father or mother, and had
no view of anything but to work hard for his living; and she did not
think fit to put any great things into his head, lest it should take him
off of his business, and perhaps make him turn giddy-headed and be good
for nothing; but she went and found out that kind man, his benefactor,
who had put him out, and finding him a plain, well-meaning, honest, and
kind-hearted man, she opened her tale to him the easier. She made a long
story, how she had a prodigious kindness for the child, because she had
the same for his father and mother; told him that she was the
servant-maid that brought all of them to their aunt's door, and run away
and left them; that their poor mother wanted bread, and what came of her
after she would have been glad to know. She added that her circumstances
had happened to mend in the world, and that, as she was in condition,
so she was disposed to show some kindness to the children if she could
find them out.

He received her with all the civility that so kind a proposal demanded,
gave her an account of what he had done for the child, how he had
maintained him, fed and clothed him, put him to school, and at last put
him out to a trade. She said he had indeed been a father to the child.
"But, sir," says she, "'tis a very laborious, hard-working trade, and he
is but a thin, weak boy." "That's true," says he; "but the boy chose the
trade, and I assure you I gave £20 with him, and am to find him clothes
all his apprenticeship; and as to its being a hard trade," says he,
"that's the fate of his circumstances, poor boy. I could not well do
better for him."

"Well, sir, as you did all for him in charity," says she, "it was
exceeding well; but, as my resolution is to do something for him, I
desire you will, if possible, take him away again from that place, where
he works so hard, for I cannot bear to see the child work so very hard
for his bread, and I will do something for him that shall make him live
without such hard labour."

He smiled at that. "I can, indeed," says he, "take him away, but then I
must lose my £20 that I gave with him."

"Well, sir," said Amy, "I'll enable you to lose that £20 immediately;"
and so she put her hand in her pocket and pulls out her purse.

He begun to be a little amazed at her, and looked her hard in the face,
and that so very much that she took notice of it, and said, "Sir, I
fancy by your looking at me you think you know me, but I am assured you
do not, for I never saw your face before. I think you have done enough
for the child, and that you ought to be acknowledged as a father to him;
but you ought not to lose by your kindness to him, more than the
kindness of bringing him up obliges you to; and therefore there's the
£20," added she, "and pray let him be fetched away."

"Well, madam," says he, "I will thank you for the boy, as well as for
myself; but will you please to tell me what I must do with him?"

"Sir," says Amy, "as you have been so kind to keep him so many years, I
beg you will take him home again one year more, and I'll bring you a
hundred pounds more, which I will desire you to lay out in schooling and
clothes for him, and to pay you for his board. Perhaps I may put him in
a condition to return your kindness."

He looked pleased, but surprised very much, and inquired of Amy, but
with very great respect, what he should go to school to learn, and what
trade she would please to put him out to.

Amy said he should put him to learn a little Latin, and then merchants'
accounts, and to write a good hand, for she would have him be put to a
Turkey merchant.

"Madam," says he, "I am glad for his sake to hear you talk so; but do
you know that a Turkey merchant will not take him under £400 or £500?"

"Yes, sir," says Amy, "I know it very well."

"And," says he, "that it will require as many thousands to set him up?"

"Yes, sir," says Amy, "I know that very well too;" and, resolving to
talk very big, she added, "I have no children of my own, and I resolve
to make him my heir, and if £10,000 be required to set him up, he shall
not want it. I was but his mother's servant when he was born, and I
mourned heartily for the disaster of the family, and I always said, if
ever I was worth anything in the world, I would take the child for my
own, and I'll be as good as my word now, though I did not then foresee
that it would be with me as it has been since." And so Amy told him a
long story how she was troubled for me, and what she would give to hear
whether I was dead or alive, and what circumstances I was in; that if
she could but find me, if I was ever so poor, she would take care of me,
and make a gentlewoman of me again.

He told her that, as to the child's mother, she had been reduced to the
last extremity, and was obliged (as he supposed she knew) to send the
children all among her husband's friends; and if it had not been for
him, they had all been sent to the parish; but that he obliged the other
relations to share the charge among them; that he had taken two, whereof
he had lost the eldest, who died of the smallpox, but that he had been
as careful of this as of his own, and had made very little difference in
their breeding up, only that when he came to put him out he thought it
was best for the boy to put him to a trade which he might set up in
without a stock, for otherwise his time would be lost; and that as to
his mother, he had never been able to hear one word of her, no, not
though he had made the utmost inquiry after her; that there went a
report that she had drowned herself, but that he could never meet with
anybody that could give him a certain account of it.

Amy counterfeited a cry for her poor mistress; told him she would give
anything in the world to see her, if she was alive; and a great deal
more such-like talk they had about that; then they returned to speak of
the boy.

He inquired of her why she did not seek after the child before, that he
might have been brought up from a younger age, suitable to what she
designed to do for him.

She told him she had been out of England, and was but newly returned
from the East Indies. That she had been out of England, and was but
newly returned, was true, but the latter was false, and was put in to
blind him, and provide against farther inquiries; for it was not a
strange thing for young women to go away poor to the East Indies, and
come home vastly rich. So she went on with directions about him, and
both agreed in this, that the boy should by no means be told what was
intended for him, but only that he should be taken home again to his
uncle's, that his uncle thought the trade too hard for him, and the
like.

About three days after this Amy goes again, and carried him the hundred
pounds she promised him, but then Amy made quite another figure than she
did before; for she went in my coach, with two footmen after her, and
dressed very fine also, with jewels and a gold watch; and there was
indeed no great difficulty to make Amy look like a lady, for she was a
very handsome, well-shaped woman, and genteel enough. The coachman and
servants were particularly ordered to show her the same respect as they
would to me, and to call her Madam Collins, if they were asked any
questions about her.

When the gentleman saw what a figure she made it added to the former
surprise, and he entertained her in the most respectful manner possible,
congratulated her advancement in fortune, and particularly rejoiced that
it should fall to the poor child's lot to be so provided for, contrary
to all expectation.

Well, Amy talked big, but very free and familiar, told them she had no
pride in her good fortune (and that was true enough, for, to give Amy
her due, she was far from it, and was as good-humoured a creature as
ever lived); that she was the same as ever; and that she always loved
this boy, and was resolved to do something extraordinary for him.

Then she pulled out her money, and paid him down a hundred and twenty
pounds, which, she said, she paid him that he might be sure he should
be no loser by taking him home again, and that she would come and see
him again, and talk farther about things with him, so that all might be
settled for him, in such a manner as accidents, such as mortality, or
anything else, should make no alteration to the child's prejudice.

At this meeting the uncle brought his wife out, a good, motherly,
comely, grave woman, who spoke very tenderly of the youth, and, as it
appeared, had been very good to him, though she had several children of
her own. After a long discourse, she put in a word of her own. "Madam,"
says she, "I am heartily glad of the good intentions you have for this
poor orphan, and I rejoice sincerely in it for his sake; but, madam, you
know, I suppose, that there are two sisters alive too; may we not speak
a word for them? Poor girls," says she, "they have not been so kindly
used as he has, and are turned out to the wide world."

"Where are they, madam?" says Amy.

"Poor creatures," says the gentlewoman, "they are out at service, nobody
knows where but themselves; their case is very hard."

"Well, madam," says Amy, "though if I could find them I would assist
them, yet my concern is for my boy, as I call him, and I will put him
into a condition to take care of his sisters."

"But, madam," says the good, compassionate creature, "he may not be so
charitable perhaps by his own inclination, for brothers are not
fathers, and they have been cruelly used already, poor girls; we have
often relieved them, both with victuals and clothes too, even while they
were pretended to be kept by their barbarous aunt."

"Well, madam," says Amy, "what can I do for them? They are gone, it
seems, and cannot be heard of. When I see them 'tis time enough."

She pressed Amy then to oblige their brother, out of the plentiful
fortune he was like to have, to do something for his sisters when he
should be able.

Amy spoke coldly of that still, but said she would consider of it; and
so they parted for that time. They had several meetings after this, for
Amy went to see her adopted son, and ordered his schooling, clothes, and
other things, but enjoined them not to tell the young man anything, but
that they thought the trade he was at too hard for him, and they would
keep him at home a little longer, and give him some schooling to fit him
for other business; and Amy appeared to him as she did before, only as
one that had known his mother and had some kindness for him.

Thus this matter passed on for near a twelvemonth, when it happened that
one of my maid-servants having asked Amy leave (for Amy was mistress of
the servants, and took and put out such as she pleased)--I say, having
asked leave to go into the city to see her friends, came home crying
bitterly, and in a most grievous agony she was, and continued so
several days till Amy, perceiving the excess, and that the maid would
certainly cry herself sick, she took an opportunity with her and
examined her about it.

The maid told her a long story, that she had been to see her brother,
the only brother she had in the world, and that she knew he was put out
apprentice to a ----; but there had come a lady in a coach to his uncle
----, who had brought him up, and made him take him home again; and so
the wench run on with the whole story just as 'tis told above, till she
came to that part that belonged to herself. "And there," says she, "I
had not let them know where I lived, and the lady would have taken me,
and, they say, would have provided for me too, as she has done for my
brother; but nobody could tell where to find me, and so I have lost it
all, and all the hopes of being anything but a poor servant all my
days;" and then the girl fell a-crying again.

Amy said, "What's all this story? Who could this lady be? It must be
some trick, sure." "No," she said, "it was not a trick, for she had made
them take her brother home from apprentice, and bought him new clothes,
and put him to have more learning; and the gentlewoman said she would
make him her heir."

"Her heir!" says Amy. "What does that amount to? It may be she had
nothing to leave him; she might make anybody her heir."

"No, no,"' says the girl; "she came in a fine coach and horses, and I
don't know how many footmen to attend her, and brought a great bag of
gold and gave it to my uncle ----, he that brought up my brother, to buy
him clothes and to pay for his schooling and board."

"He that brought up your brother?" says Amy. "Why, did not he bring you
up too as well as your brother? Pray who brought you up, then?"

Here the poor girl told a melancholy story, how an aunt had brought up
her and her sister, and how barbarously she had used them, as we have
heard.

By this time Amy had her head full enough, and her heart too, and did
not know how to hold it, or what to do, for she was satisfied that this
was no other than my own daughter, for she told her all the history of
her father and mother, and how she was carried by their maid to her
aunt's door, just as is related in the beginning of my story.

Amy did not tell me this story for a great while, nor did she well know
what course to take in it; but as she had authority to manage everything
in the family, she took occasion some time after, without letting me
know anything of it, to find some fault with the maid and turn her away.

Her reasons were good, though at first I was not pleased when I heard of
it, but I was convinced afterwards that she was in the right, for if she
had told me of it I should have been in great perplexity between the
difficulty of concealing myself from my own child and the inconvenience
of having my way of living be known among my first husband's relations,
and even to my husband himself; for as to his being dead at Paris, Amy,
seeing me resolved against marrying any more, had told me that she had
formed that story only to make me easy when I was in Holland if anything
should offer to my liking.

However, I was too tender a mother still, notwithstanding what I had
done, to let this poor girl go about the world drudging, as it were, for
bread, and slaving at the fire and in the kitchen as a cook-maid;
besides, it came into my head that she might perhaps marry some poor
devil of a footman, or a coachman, or some such thing, and be undone
that way, or, which was worse, be drawn in to lie with some of that
coarse, cursed kind, and be with child, and be utterly ruined that way;
and in the midst of all my prosperity this gave me great uneasiness.

As to sending Amy to her, there was no doing that now, for, as she had
been servant in the house, she knew Amy as well as Amy knew me; and no
doubt, though I was much out of her sight, yet she might have had the
curiosity to have peeped at me, and seen me enough to know me again if I
had discovered myself to her; so that, in short, there was nothing to be
done that way.

However, Amy, a diligent indefatigable creature, found out another
woman, and gave her her errand, and sent her to the honest man's house
in Spitalfields, whither she supposed the girl would go after she was
out of her place; and bade her talk with her, and tell her at a distance
that as something had been done for her brother, so something would be
done for her too; and, that she should not be discouraged, she carried
her £20 to buy her clothes, and bid her not go to service any more, but
think of other things; that she should take a lodging in some good
family, and that she should soon hear farther.

The girl was overjoyed with this news, you may be sure, and at first a
little too much elevated with it, and dressed herself very handsomely
indeed, and as soon as she had done so came and paid a visit to Madam
Amy, to let her see how fine she was. Amy congratulated her, and wished
it might be all as she expected, but admonished her not to be elevated
with it too much; told her humility was the best ornament of a
gentlewoman, and a great deal of good advice she gave her, but
discovered nothing.

All this was acted in the first years of my setting up my new figure
here in town, and while the masks and balls were in agitation; and Amy
carried on the affair of setting out my son into the world, which we
were assisted in by the sage advice of my faithful counsellor, Sir
Robert Clayton, who procured us a master for him, by whom he was
afterwards sent abroad to Italy, as you shall hear in its place; and Amy
managed my daughter too very well, though by a third hand.

My amour with my Lord ---- began now to draw to an end, and indeed,
notwithstanding his money, it had lasted so long that I was much more
sick of his lordship than he could be of me. He grew old and fretful,
and captious, and I must add, which made the vice itself begin to grow
surfeiting and nauseous to me, he grew worse and wickeder the older he
grew, and that to such degree as is not fit to write of, and made me so
weary of him that upon one of his capricious humours, which he often
took occasion to trouble me with, I took occasion to be much less
complaisant to him than I used to be; and as I knew him to be hasty, I
first took care to put him into a little passion, and then to resent it,
and this brought us to words, in which I told him I thought he grew sick
of me; and he answered in a heat that truly so he was. I answered that I
found his lordship was endeavouring to make me sick too; that I had met
with several such rubs from him of late, and that he did not use me as
he used to do, and I begged his lordship he would make himself easy.
This I spoke with an air of coldness and indifference such as I knew he
could not bear; but I did not downright quarrel with him and tell him I
was sick of him too, and desire him to quit me, for I knew that would
come of itself; besides, I had received a great deal of handsome usage
from him, and I was loth to have the breach be on my side, that he might
not be able to say I was ungrateful.

[Illustration: THE AMOUR DRAWS TO AN END

_I told him I thought he grew sick of me; and he answered in a heat that
truly so he was_]

But he put the occasion into my hands, for he came no more to me for two
months; indeed I expected a fit of absence, for such I had had several
times before, but not for above a fortnight or three weeks at most;
but after I had stayed a month, which was longer than ever he kept away
yet, I took a new method with him, for I was resolved now it should be
in my power to continue or not, as I thought fit. At the end of a month,
therefore, I removed, and took lodgings at Kensington Gravel Pits, at
that part next to the road to Acton, and left nobody in my lodgings but
Amy and a footman, with proper instructions how to behave when his
lordship, being come to himself, should think fit to come again, which I
knew he would.

About the end of two months, he came in the dusk of the evening as
usual. The footman answered him, and told him his lady was not at home,
but there was Mrs. Amy above; so he did not order her to be called down,
but went upstairs into the dining-room, and Mrs. Amy came to him. He
asked where I was. "My lord," said she, "my mistress has been removed a
good while from hence, and lives at Kensington." "Ah, Mrs. Amy! how came
you to be here, then?" "My lord," said she, "we are here till the
quarter-day, because the goods are not removed, and to give answers if
any comes to ask for my lady." "Well, and what answer are you to give to
me?" "Indeed, my lord," says Amy, "I have no particular answer to your
lordship, but to tell you and everybody else where my lady lives, that
they may not think she's run away." "No, Mrs. Amy," says he, "I don't
think she's run away; but, indeed, I can't go after her so far as
that." Amy said nothing to that, but made a courtesy, and said she
believed I would be there again for a week or two in a little time. "How
little time, Mrs Amy?" says my lord. "She comes next Tuesday," says Amy.
"Very well," says my lord; "I'll call and see her then;" and so he went
away.

Accordingly I came on the Tuesday, and stayed a fortnight, but he came
not; so I went back to Kensington, and after that I had very few of his
lordship's visits, which I was very glad of, and in a little time after
was more glad of it than I was at first, and upon a far better account
too.

For now I began not to be sick of his lordship only, but really I began
to be sick of the vice; and as I had good leisure now to divert and
enjoy myself in the world as much as it was possible for any woman to do
that ever lived in it, so I found that my judgment began to prevail upon
me to fix my delight upon nobler objects than I had formerly done, and
the very beginning of this brought some just reflections upon me
relating to things past, and to the former manner of my living; and
though there was not the least hint in all this from what may be called
religion or conscience, and far from anything of repentance, or anything
that was akin to it, especially at first, yet the sense of things, and
the knowledge I had of the world, and the vast variety of scenes that I
had acted my part in, began to work upon my senses, and it came so very
strong upon my mind one morning when I had been lying awake some time
in my bed, as if somebody had asked me the question, What was I a whore
for now? It occurred naturally upon this inquiry, that at first I
yielded to the importunity of my circumstances, the misery of which the
devil dismally aggravated, to draw me to comply; for I confess I had
strong natural aversions to the crime at first, partly owing to a
virtuous education, and partly to a sense of religion; but the devil,
and that greater devil of poverty, prevailed; and the person who laid
siege to me did it in such an obliging, and I may almost say
irresistible, manner, all still managed by the evil spirit; for I must
be allowed to believe that he has a share in all such things, if not the
whole management of them. But, I say, it was carried on by that person
in such an irresistible manner that, as I said when I related the fact,
there was no withstanding it; these circumstances, I say, the devil
managed not only to bring me to comply, but he continued them as
arguments to fortify my mind against all reflection, and to keep me in
that horrid course I had engaged in, as if it were honest and lawful.

But not to dwell upon that now; this was a pretence, and here was
something to be said, though I acknowledge it ought not to have been
sufficient to me at all; but, I say, to leave that, all this was out of
doors; the devil himself could not form one argument, or put one reason
into my head now, that could serve for an answer--no, not so much as a
pretended answer to this question, why I should be a whore now.

It had for a while been a little kind of excuse to me that I was engaged
with this wicked old lord, and that I could not in honour forsake him;
but how foolish and absurd did it look to repeat the word "honour" on so
vile an occasion! as if a woman should prostitute her honour in point of
honour--horrid inconsistency! Honour called upon me to detest the crime
and the man too, and to have resisted all the attacks which, from the
beginning, had been made upon my virtue; and honour, had it been
consulted, would have preserved me honest from the beginning:

     "For 'honesty' and 'honour' are the same."

This, however, shows us with what faint excuses and with what trifles we
pretend to satisfy ourselves, and suppress the attempts of conscience,
in the pursuit of agreeable crime, and in the possessing those pleasures
which we are loth to part with.

But this objection would now serve no longer, for my lord had in some
sort broke his engagements (I won't call it honour again) with me, and
had so far slighted me as fairly to justify my entire quitting of him
now; and so, as the objection was fully answered, the question remained
still unanswered, Why am I a whore now? Nor indeed had I anything to say
for myself, even to myself; I could not without blushing, as wicked as I
was, answer that I loved it for the sake of the vice, and that I
delighted in being a whore, as such; I say, I could not say this, even
to myself, and all alone, nor indeed would it have been true. I was
never able, in justice and with truth, to say I was so wicked as that;
but as necessity first debauched me, and poverty made me a whore at the
beginning, so excess of avarice for getting money and excess of vanity
continued me in the crime, not being able to resist the flatteries of
great persons; being called the finest woman in France; being caressed
by a prince; and afterwards, I had pride enough to expect and folly
enough to believe, though indeed without ground, by a great monarch.
These were my baits, these the chains by which the devil held me bound,
and by which I was indeed too fast held for any reasoning that I was
then mistress of to deliver me from.

But this was all over now; avarice could have no pretence. I was out of
the reach of all that fate could be supposed to do to reduce me; now I
was so far from poor, or the danger of it, that I had £50,000 in my
pocket at least; nay, I had the income of £50,000, for I had £2500 a
year coming in upon very good land security, besides three or four
thousand pounds in money, which I kept by me for ordinary occasions,
and, besides, jewels, and plate, and goods which were worth near £5600
more; these put together, when I ruminated on it all in my thoughts, as
you may be sure I did often, added weight still to the question, as
above, and it sounded continually in my head, "What next? What am I a
whore for now?"

It is true this was, as I say, seldom out of my thoughts, but yet it
made no impressions upon me of that kind which might be expected from a
reflection of so important a nature, and which had so much of substance
and seriousness in it.

But, however, it was not without some little consequences, even at that
time, and which gave a little turn to my way of living at first, as you
shall hear in its place.

But one particular thing intervened besides this which gave me some
uneasiness at this time, and made way for other things that followed. I
have mentioned in several little digressions the concern I had upon me
for my children, and in what manner I had directed that affair; I must
go on a little with that part, in order to bring the subsequent parts of
my story together.

My boy, the only son I had left that I had a legal right to call "son,"
was, as I have said, rescued from the unhappy circumstances of being
apprentice to a mechanic, and was brought up upon a new foot; but though
this was infinitely to his advantage, yet it put him back near three
years in his coming into this world; for he had been near a year at the
drudgery he was first put to, and it took up two years more to form him
for what he had hopes given him he should hereafter be, so that he was
full nineteen years old, or rather twenty years, before he came to be
put out as I intended; at the end of which time I put him to a very
flourishing Italian merchant, and he again sent him to Messina, in the
island of Sicily; and a little before the juncture I am now speaking of
I had letters from him--that is to say, Mrs. Amy had letters from him,
intimating that he was out of his time, and that he had an opportunity
to be taken into an English house there, on very good terms, if his
support from hence might answer what he was bid to hope for; and so
begged that what would be done for him might be so ordered that he might
have it for his present advancement, referring for the particulars to
his master, the merchant in London, who he had been put apprentice to
here; who, to cut the story short, gave such a satisfactory account of
it, and of my young man, to my steady and faithful counsellor, Sir
Robert Clayton, that I made no scruple to pay £4000, which was £1000
more than he demanded, or rather proposed, that he might have
encouragement to enter into the world better than he expected.

His master remitted the money very faithfully to him; and finding, by
Sir Robert Clayton, that the young gentleman--for so he called him--was
well supported, wrote such letters on his account as gave him a credit
at Messina equal in value to the money itself.

I could not digest it very well that I should all this while conceal
myself thus from my own child, and make all this favour due, in his
opinion, to a stranger; and yet I could not find in my heart to let my
son know what a mother he had, and what a life she lived; when, at the
same time that he must think himself infinitely obliged to me, he must
be obliged, if he was a man of virtue, to hate his mother, and abhor the
way of living by which all the bounty he enjoyed was raised.

This is the reason of mentioning this part of my son's story, which is
otherwise no ways concerned in my history, but as it put me upon
thinking how to put an end to that wicked course I was in, that my own
child, when he should afterwards come to England in a good figure, and
with the appearance of a merchant, should not be ashamed to own me.

But there was another difficulty, which lay heavier upon me a great
deal, and that was my daughter, who, as before, I had relieved by the
hands of another instrument, which Amy had procured. The girl, as I have
mentioned, was directed to put herself into a good garb, take lodgings,
and entertain a maid to wait upon her, and to give herself some
breeding--that is to say, to learn to dance, and fit herself to appear
as a gentlewoman; being made to hope that she should, some time or
other, find that she should be put into a condition to support her
character, and to make herself amends for all her former troubles. She
was only charged not to be drawn into matrimony till she was secured of
a fortune that might assist to dispose of herself suitable not to what
she then was, but what she was to be.

The girl was too sensible of her circumstances not to give all possible
satisfaction of that kind, and indeed she was mistress of too much
understanding not to see how much she should be obliged to that part for
her own interest.

It was not long after this, but being well equipped, and in everything
well set out, as she was directed, she came, as I have related above,
and paid a visit to Mrs. Amy, and to tell her of her good fortune. Amy
pretended to be much surprised at the alteration, and overjoyed for her
sake, and began to treat her very well, entertained her handsomely, and
when she would have gone away, pretended to ask my leave, and sent my
coach home with her; and, in short, learning from her where she lodged,
which was in the city, Amy promised to return her visit, and did so;
and, in a word, Amy and Susan (for she was my own name) began an
intimate acquaintance together.

There was an inexpressible difficulty in the poor girl's way, or else I
should not have been able to have forborne discovering myself to her,
and this was, her having been a servant in my particular family; and I
could by no means think of ever letting the children know what a kind of
creature they owed their being to, or giving them an occasion to upbraid
their mother with her scandalous life, much less to justify the like
practice from my example.

Thus it was with me; and thus, no doubt, considering parents always find
it that their own children are a restraint to them in their worst
courses, when the sense of a superior power has not the same influence.
But of that hereafter.

There happened, however, one good circumstance in the case of this poor
girl, which brought about a discovery sooner than otherwise it would
have been, and it was thus. After she and Amy had been intimate for some
time, and had exchanged several visits, the girl, now grown a woman,
talking to Amy of the gay things that used to fall out when she was
servant in my family, spoke of it with a kind of concern that she could
not see (me) her lady; and at last she adds, "'Twas very strange,
madam," says she to Amy, "but though I lived near two years in the
house, I never saw my mistress in my life, except it was that public
night when she danced in the fine Turkish habit, and then she was so
disguised that I knew nothing of her afterwards."

Amy was glad to hear this, but as she was a cunning girl from the
beginning, she was not to be bit, and so she laid no stress upon that at
first, but gave me an account of it; and I must confess it gave me a
secret joy to think that I was not known to her, and that, by virtue of
that only accident, I might, when other circumstances made room for it,
discover myself to her, and let her know she had a mother in a condition
fit to be owned.

It was a dreadful restraint to me before, and this gave me some very sad
reflections, and made way for the great question I have mentioned above;
and by how much the circumstance was bitter to me, by so much the more
agreeable it was to understand that the girl had never seen me, and
consequently did not know me again if she was to be told who I was.

However, the next time she came to visit Amy, I was resolved to put it
to a trial, and to come into the room and let her see me, and to see by
that whether she knew me or not; but Amy put me by, lest indeed, as
there was reason enough to question, I should not be able to contain or
forbear discovering myself to her; so it went off for that time.

But both these circumstances, and that is the reason of mentioning them,
brought me to consider of the life I lived, and to resolve to put myself
into some figure of life in which I might not be scandalous to my own
family, and be afraid to make myself known to my own children, who were
my own flesh and blood.

There was another daughter I had, which, with all our inquiries, we
could not hear of, high nor low, for several years after the first. But
I return to my own story.

Being now in part removed from my old station, I seemed to be in a fair
way of retiring from my old acquaintances, and consequently from the
vile, abominable trade I had driven so long; so that the door seemed to
be, as it were, particularly open to my reformation, if I had any mind
to it in earnest; but, for all that, some of my old friends, as I had
used to call them, inquired me out, and came to visit me at Kensington,
and that more frequently than I wished they would do; but it being once
known where I was, there was no avoiding it, unless I would have
downright refused and affronted them; and I was not yet in earnest
enough with my resolutions to go that length.

The best of it was, my old lewd favourite, who I now heartily hated,
entirely dropped me. He came once to visit me, but I caused Amy to deny
me, and say I was gone out. She did it so oddly, too, that when his
lordship went away, he said coldly to her, "Well, well, Mrs. Amy, I find
your mistress does not desire to be seen; tell her I won't trouble her
any more," repeating the words "any more" two or three times over, just
at his going away.

I reflected a little on it at first as unkind to him, having had so many
considerable presents from him, but, as I have said, I was sick of him,
and that on some accounts which, if I could suffer myself to publish
them, would fully justify my conduct. But that part of the story will
not bear telling, so I must leave it, and proceed.

I had begun a little, as I have said above, to reflect upon my manner of
living, and to think of putting a new face upon it, and nothing moved me
to it more than the consideration of my having three children, who were
now grown up; and yet that while I was in that station of life I could
not converse with them or make myself known to them; and this gave me a
great deal of uneasiness. At last I entered into talk on this part of it
with my woman Amy.

We lived at Kensington, as I have said, and though I had done with my
old wicked l----, as above, yet I was frequently visited, as I said, by
some others; so that, in a word, I began to be known in the town, not by
name only, but by my character too, which was worse.

It was one morning when Amy was in bed with me, and I had some of my
dullest thoughts about me, that Amy, hearing me sigh pretty often, asked
me if I was not well. "Yes, Amy, I am well enough," says I, "but my mind
is oppressed with heavy thoughts, and has been so a good while;" and
then I told her how it grieved me that I could not make myself known to
my own children, or form any acquaintances in the world. "Why so?" says
Amy. "Why, prithee, Amy," says I, "what will my children say to
themselves, and to one another, when they find their mother, however
rich she may be, is at best but a whore, a common whore? And as for
acquaintance, prithee, Amy, what sober lady or what family of any
character will visit or be acquainted with a whore?"

"Why, all that's true, madam," says Amy; "but how can it be remedied
now?" "'Tis true, Amy," said I, "the thing cannot be remedied now, but
the scandal of it, I fancy, may be thrown off."

"Truly," says Amy, "I do not see how, unless you will go abroad again,
and live in some other nation where nobody has known us or seen us, so
that they cannot say they ever saw us before."

That very thought of Amy put what follows into my head, and I returned,
"Why, Amy," says I, "is it not possible for me to shift my being from
this part of the town and go and live in another part of the city, or
another part of the country, and be as entirely concealed as if I had
never been known?"

"Yes," says Amy, "I believe it might; but then you must put off all your
equipages and servants, coaches and horses, change your liveries--nay,
your own clothes, and, if it was possible, your very face."

"Well," says I, "and that's the way, Amy, and that I'll do, and that
forthwith; for I am not able to live in this manner any longer." Amy
came into this with a kind of pleasure particular to herself--that is to
say, with an eagerness not to be resisted; for Amy was apt to be
precipitant in her motions, and was for doing it immediately. "Well,"
says I, "Amy, as soon as you will; but what course must we take to do
it? We cannot put off servants, and coach and horses, and everything,
leave off housekeeping, and transform ourselves into a new shape all in
a moment; servants must have warning, and the goods must be sold off,
and a thousand things;" and this began to perplex us, and in particular
took us up two or three days' consideration.

At last Amy, who was a clever manager in such cases, came to me with a
scheme, as she called it. "I have found it out, madam," says she, "I
have found a scheme how you shall, if you have a mind to it, begin and
finish a perfect entire change of your figure and circumstances in one
day, and shall be as much unknown, madam, in twenty-four hours, as you
would be in so many years."

"Come, Amy," says I, "let us hear of it, for you please me mightily with
the thoughts of it." "Why, then," says Amy, "let me go into the city
this afternoon, and I'll inquire out some honest, plain sober family,
where I will take lodgings for you, as for a country gentlewoman that
desires to be in London for about half a year, and to board yourself and
a kinswoman--that is, half a servant, half a companion, meaning myself;
and so agree with them by the month. To this lodging (if I hit upon one
to your mind) you may go to-morrow morning in a hackney-coach, with
nobody but me, and leave such clothes and linen as you think fit, but,
to be sure, the plainest you have; and then you are removed at once; you
never need set your foot in this house again" (meaning where we then
were), "or see anybody belonging to it. In the meantime I'll let the
servants know that you are going over to Holland upon extraordinary
business, and will leave off your equipages, and so I'll give them
warning, or, if they will accept of it, give them a month's wages. Then
I'll sell off your furniture as well as I can. As to your coach, it is
but having it new painted and the lining changed, and getting new
harness and hammercloths, and you may keep it still or dispose of it as
you think fit. And only take care to let this lodging be in some remote
part of the town, and you may be as perfectly unknown as if you had
never been in England in your life."

This was Amy's scheme, and it pleased me so well that I resolved not
only to let her go, but was resolved to go with her myself; but Amy put
me off of that, because, she said, she should have occasion to hurry up
and down so long that if I was with her it would rather hinder than
further her, so I waived it.

In a word, Amy went, and was gone five long hours; but when she came
back I could see by her countenance that her success had been suitable
to her pains, for she came laughing and gaping. "O madam!" says she, "I
have pleased you to the life;" and with that she tells me how she had
fixed upon a house in a court in the Minories; that she was directed to
it merely by accident; that it was a female family, the master of the
house being gone to New England, and that the woman had four children,
kept two maids, and lived very handsomely, but wanted company to divert
her; and that on that very account she had agreed to take boarders.

Amy agreed for a good, handsome price, because she was resolved I should
be used well; so she bargained to give her £35 for the half-year, and
£50 if we took a maid, leaving that to my choice; and that we might be
satisfied we should meet with nothing very gay, the people were Quakers,
and I liked them the better.

I was so pleased that I resolved to go with Amy the next day to see the
lodgings, and to see the woman of the house, and see how I liked them;
but if I was pleased with the general, I was much more pleased with the
particulars, for the gentlewoman--I must call her so, though she was a
Quaker--was a most courteous, obliging, mannerly person, perfectly
well-bred and perfectly well-humoured, and, in short, the most agreeable
conversation that ever I met with; and, which was worth all, so grave,
and yet so pleasant and so merry, that 'tis scarcely possible for me to
express how I was pleased and delighted with her company; and
particularly, I was so pleased that I would go away no more; so I e'en
took up my lodging there the very first night.

In the meantime, though it took up Amy almost a month so entirely to put
off all the appearances of housekeeping, as above, it need take me up no
time to relate it; 'tis enough to say that Amy quitted all that part of
the world and came pack and package to me, and here we took up our
abode.

I was now in a perfect retreat indeed, remote from the eyes of all that
ever had seen me, and as much out of the way of being ever seen or heard
of by any of the gang that used to follow me as if I had been among the
mountains in Lancashire; for when did a blue garter or a coach-and-six
come into a little narrow passage in the Minories or Goodman's Fields?
And as there was no fear of them, so really I had no desire to see them,
or so much as to hear from them any more as long as I lived.

I seemed in a little hurry while Amy came and went so every day at
first, but when that was over I lived here perfectly retired, and with a
most pleasant and agreeable lady; I must call her so, for, though a
Quaker, she had a full share of good breeding, sufficient to her if she
had been a duchess; in a word, she was the most agreeable creature in
her conversation, as I said before, that ever I met with.

I pretended, after I had been there some time, to be extremely in love
with the dress of the Quakers, and this pleased her so much that she
would needs dress me up one day in a suit of her own clothes; but my
real design was to see whether it would pass upon me for a disguise.

Amy was struck with the novelty, though I had not mentioned my design to
her, and when the Quaker was gone out of the room says Amy, "I guess
your meaning; it is a perfect disguise to you. Why, you look quite
another body; I should not have known you myself. Nay," says Amy, "more
than that, it makes you look ten years younger than you did."

Nothing could please me better than that, and when Amy repeated it, I
was so fond of it that I asked my Quaker (I won't call her landlady;
'tis indeed too coarse a word for her, and she deserved a much
better)--I say, I asked her if she would sell it. I told her I was so
fond of it that I would give her enough to buy her a better suit. She
declined it at first, but I soon perceived that it was chiefly in good
manners, because I should not dishonour myself, as she called it, to put
on her old clothes; but if I pleased to accept of them, she would give
me them for my dressing-clothes, and go with me, and buy a suit for me
that might be better worth my wearing.

But as I conversed in a very frank, open manner with her, I bid her do
the like with me; that I made no scruples of such things, but that if
she would let me have them I would satisfy her. So she let me know what
they cost, and to make her amends I gave her three guineas more than
they cost her.

This good (though unhappy) Quaker had the misfortune to have had a bad
husband, and he was gone beyond sea. She had a good house, and well
furnished, and had some jointure of her own estate which supported her
and her children, so that she did not want; but she was not at all above
such a help as my being there was to her; so she was as glad of me as I
was of her.

However, as I knew there was no way to fix this new acquaintance like
making myself a friend to her, I began with making her some handsome
presents and the like to her children. And first, opening my bundles one
day in my chamber, I heard her in another room, and called her in with a
kind of familiar way. There I showed her some of my fine clothes, and
having among the rest of my things a piece of very fine new holland,
which I had bought a little before, worth about 9s. an ell, I pulled it
out: "Here, my friend," says I, "I will make you a present, if you will
accept of it;" and with that I laid the piece of Holland in her lap.

I could see she was surprised, and that she could hardly speak. "What
dost thou mean?" says she. "Indeed I cannot have the face to accept so
fine a present as this;" adding, "'Tis fit for thy own use, but 'tis
above my wear, indeed." I thought she had meant she must not wear it so
fine because she was a Quaker. So I returned, "Why, do not you Quakers
wear fine linen neither?" "Yes," says she, "we wear fine linen when we
can afford it, but this is too good for me." However, I made her take
it, and she was very thankful too. But my end was answered another way,
for by this I engaged her so, that as I found her a woman of
understanding, and of honesty too, I might, upon any occasion, have a
confidence in her, which was, indeed, what I very much wanted.

By accustoming myself to converse with her, I had not only learned to
dress like a Quaker, but so used myself to "thee" and "thou" that I
talked like a Quaker too, as readily and naturally as if I had been born
among them; and, in a word, I passed for a Quaker among all people that
did not know me. I went but little abroad, but I had been so used to a
coach that I knew not how well to go without one; besides, I thought it
would be a farther disguise to me, so I told my Quaker friend one day
that I thought I lived too close, that I wanted air. She proposed
taking a hackney-coach sometimes, or a boat; but I told her I had always
had a coach of my own till now, and I could find in my heart to have one
again.

She seemed to think it strange at first, considering how close I lived,
but had nothing to say when she found I did not value the expense; so,
in short, I resolved I would have a coach. When we came to talk of
equipages, she extolled the having all things plain. I said so too; so I
left it to her direction, and a coachmaker was sent for, and he provided
me a plain coach, no gilding or painting, lined with a light grey cloth,
and my coachman had a coat of the same, and no lace on his hat.

When all was ready I dressed myself in the dress I bought of her, and
said, "Come, I'll be a Quaker to-day, and you and I'll go abroad;" which
we did, and there was not a Quaker in the town looked less like a
counterfeit than I did. But all this was my particular plot, to be the
more completely concealed, and that I might depend upon being not known,
and yet need not be confined like a prisoner and be always in fear; so
that all the rest was grimace.

We lived here very easy and quiet, and yet I cannot say I was so in my
mind; I was like a fish out of water. I was as gay and as young in my
disposition as I was at five-and-twenty; and as I had always been
courted, flattered, and used to love it, so I missed it in my
conversation; and this put me many times upon looking back upon things
past.

I had very few moments in my life which, in their reflection, afforded
me anything but regret: but of all the foolish actions I had to look
back upon in my life, none looked so preposterous and so like
distraction, nor left so much melancholy on my mind, as my parting with
my friend, the merchant of Paris, and the refusing him upon such
honourable and just conditions as he had offered; and though on his just
(which I called unkind) rejecting my invitation to come to him again, I
had looked on him with some disgust, yet now my mind run upon him
continually, and the ridiculous conduct of my refusing him, and I could
never be satisfied about him. I flattered myself that if I could but see
him I could yet master him, and that he would presently forget all that
had passed that might be thought unkind; but as there was no room to
imagine anything like that to be possible, I threw those thoughts off
again as much as I could.

However, they continually returned, and I had no rest night or day for
thinking of him, who I had forgot above eleven years. I told Amy of it,
and we talked it over sometimes in bed, almost whole nights together. At
last Amy started a thing of her own head, which put it in a way of
management, though a wild one too. "You are so uneasy, madam," says she,
"about this Mr. ----, the merchant at Paris; come," says she, "if you'll
give me leave, I'll go over and see what's become of him."

"Not for ten thousand pounds," said I; "no, nor if you met him in the
street, not to offer to speak to him on my account." "No," says Amy, "I
would not speak to him at all; or if I did, I warrant you it shall not
look to be upon your account. I'll only inquire after him, and if he is
in being, you shall hear of him; if not, you shall hear of him still,
and that may be enough."

"Why," says I, "if you will promise me not to enter into anything
relating to me with him, nor to begin any discourse at all unless he
begins it with you, I could almost be persuaded to let you go and try."

Amy promised me all that I desired; and, in a word, to cut the story
short, I let her go, but tied her up to so many particulars that it was
almost impossible her going could signify anything; and had she intended
to observe them, she might as well have stayed at home as have gone, for
I charged her, if she came to see him, she should not so much as take
notice that she knew him again; and if he spoke to her, she should tell
him she was come away from me a great many years ago, and knew nothing
what was become of me; that she had been come over to France six years
ago, and was married there, and lived at Calais; or to that purpose.

Amy promised me nothing, indeed; for, as she said, it was impossible for
her to resolve what would be fit to do, or not to do, till she was there
upon the spot, and had found out the gentleman, or heard of him; but
that then, if I would trust her, as I had always done, she would answer
for it that she would do nothing but what should be for my interest,
and what she would hope I should be very well pleased with.

With this general commission, Amy, notwithstanding she had been so
frighted at the sea, ventured her carcass once more by water, and away
she goes to France. She had four articles of confidence in charge to
inquire after for me, and, as I found by her, she had one for herself--I
say, four for me, because, though her first and principal errand was to
inform myself of my Dutch merchant, yet I gave her in charge to inquire,
second, after my husband, who I left a trooper in the _gens d'armes_;
third, after that rogue of a Jew, whose very name I hated, and of whose
face I had such a frightful idea that Satan himself could not
counterfeit a worse; and, lastly, after my foreign prince. And she
discharged herself very well of them all, though not so successful as I
wished.

Amy had a very good passage over the sea, and I had a letter from her,
from Calais, in three days after she went from London. When she came to
Paris she wrote me an account, that as to her first and most important
inquiry, which was after the Dutch merchant, her account was, that he
had returned to Paris, lived three years there, and quitting that city,
went to live at Rouen; so away goes Amy for Rouen.

But as she was going to bespeak a place in the coach to Rouen, she meets
very accidentally in the street with her gentleman, as I called
him--that is to say, the Prince de ----'s gentleman, who had been her
favourite, as above.

You may be sure there were several other kind things happened between
Amy and him, as you shall hear afterwards; but the two main things were,
first, that Amy inquired about his lord, and had a full account of him,
of which presently; and, in the next place, telling him whither she was
going and for what, he bade her not go yet, for that he would have a
particular account of it the next day from a merchant that knew him;
and, accordingly, he brought her word the next day that he had been for
six years before that gone for Holland, and that he lived there still.

This, I say, was the first news from Amy for some time--I mean about my
merchant. In the meantime Amy, as I have said, inquired about the other
persons she had in her instructions. As for the prince, the gentleman
told her he was gone into Germany, where his estate lay, and that he
lived there; that he had made great inquiry after me; that he (his
gentleman) had made all the search he had been able for me, but that he
could not hear of me; that he believed, if his lord had known I had been
in England, he would have gone over to me; but that, after long inquiry,
he was obliged to give it over; but that he verily believed, if he could
have found me, he would have married me; and that he was extremely
concerned that he could hear nothing of me.

I was not at all satisfied with Amy's account, but ordered her to go to
Rouen herself, which she did, and there with much difficulty (the
person she was directed to being dead)--I say, with much difficulty she
came to be informed that my merchant had lived there two years, or
something more, but that, having met with a very great misfortune, he
had gone back to Holland, as the French merchant said, where he had
stayed two years; but with this addition, viz., that he came back again
to Rouen, and lived in good reputation there another year; and
afterwards he was gone to England, and that he lived in London. But Amy
could by no means learn how to write to him there, till, by great
accident, an old Dutch skipper, who had formerly served him, coming to
Rouen, Amy was told of it; and he told her that he lodged in St.
Laurence Pountney's Lane, in London, but was to be seen every day upon
the Exchange, in the French walk.

This, Amy thought, it was time enough to tell me of when she came over;
and, besides, she did not find this Dutch skipper till she had spent
four or five months and been again in Paris, and then come back to Rouen
for farther information. But in the meantime she wrote to me from Paris
that he was not to be found by any means; that he had been gone from
Paris seven or eight years; that she was told he had lived at Rouen, and
she was agoing thither to inquire, but that she had heard afterwards
that he was gone also from thence to Holland, so she did not go.

This, I say, was Amy's first account; and I, not satisfied with it, had
sent her an order to go to Rouen to inquire there also, as above.

While this was negotiating, and I received these accounts from Amy at
several times, a strange adventure happened to me which I must mention
just here. I had been abroad to take the air as usual with my Quaker, as
far as Epping Forest, and we were driving back towards London, when, on
the road between Bow and Mile End, two gentlemen on horseback came
riding by, having overtaken the coach and passed it, and went forwards
towards London.

They did not ride apace though they passed the coach, for we went very
softly; nor did they look into the coach at all, but rode side by side,
earnestly talking to one another and inclining their faces sideways a
little towards one another, he that went nearest the coach with his face
from it, and he that was farthest from the coach with his face towards
it, and passing in the very next tract to the coach, I could hear them
talk Dutch very distinctly. But it is impossible to describe the
confusion I was in when I plainly saw that the farthest of the two, him
whose face looked towards the coach, was my friend the Dutch merchant of
Paris.

If it had been possible to conceal my disorder from my friend the Quaker
I would have done it, but I found she was too well acquainted with such
things not to take the hint. "Dost thou understand Dutch?" said she.
"Why?" said I. "Why," says she, "it is easy to suppose that thou art a
little concerned at somewhat those men say; I suppose they are talking
of thee." "Indeed, my good friend," said I, "thou art mistaken this
time, for I know very well what they are talking of, but 'tis all about
ships and trading affairs." "Well," says she, "then one of them is a man
friend of thine, or somewhat is the case; for though thy tongue will not
confess it, thy face does."

I was going to have told a bold lie, and said I knew nothing of them;
but I found it was impossible to conceal it, so I said, "Indeed, I think
I know the farthest of them; but I have neither spoken to him or so much
as seen him for about eleven years." "Well, then," says she, "thou hast
seen him with more than common eyes when thou didst see him, or else
seeing him now would not be such a surprise to thee." "Indeed," said I,
"it is true I am a little surprised at seeing him just now, for I
thought he had been in quite another part of the world; and I can assure
you I never saw him in England in my life." "Well, then, it is the more
likely he is come over now on purpose to seek thee." "No, no," said I,
"knight-errantry is over; women are not so hard to come at that men
should not be able to please themselves without running from one kingdom
to another." "Well, well," says she, "I would have him see thee for all
that, as plainly as thou hast seen him." "No, but he shan't," says I,
"for I am sure he don't know me in this dress, and I'll take care he
shan't see my face, if I can help it;" so I held up my fan before my
face, and she saw me resolute in that, so she pressed me no farther.

We had several discourses upon the subject, but still I let her know I
was resolved he should not know me; but at last I confessed so much,
that though I would not let him know who I was or where I lived, I did
not care if I knew where he lived and how I might inquire about him. She
took the hint immediately, and her servant being behind the coach, she
called him to the coach-side and bade him keep his eye upon that
gentleman, and as soon as the coach came to the end of Whitechapel he
should get down and follow him closely, so as to see where he put up his
horse, and then to go into the inn and inquire, if he could, who he was
and where he lived.

The fellow followed diligently to the gate of an inn in Bishopsgate
Street, and seeing him go in, made no doubt but he had him fast; but was
confounded when, upon inquiry, he found the inn was a thoroughfare into
another street, and that the two gentlemen had only rode through the
inn, as the way to the street where they were going; and so, in short,
came back no wiser than he went.

My kind Quaker was more vexed at the disappointment, at least apparently
so, than I was; and asking the fellow if he was sure he knew the
gentleman again if he saw him, the fellow said he had followed him so
close and took so much notice of him, in order to do his errand as it
ought to be done, that he was very sure he should know him again; and
that, besides, he was sure he should know his horse.

This part was, indeed, likely enough; and the kind Quaker, without
telling me anything of the matter, caused her man to place himself just
at the corner of Whitechapel Church wall every Saturday in the
afternoon, that being the day when the citizens chiefly ride abroad to
take the air, and there to watch all the afternoon and look for him.

It was not till the fifth Saturday that her man came, with a great deal
of joy, and gave her an account that he had found out the gentleman;
that he was a Dutchman, but a French merchant; that he came from Rouen,
and his name was ----, and that he lodged at Mr. ----'s, on Laurence
Pountney's Hill. I was surprised, you may be sure, when she came and
told me one evening all the particulars, except that of having set her
man to watch. "I have found out thy Dutch friend," says she, "and can
tell thee how to find him too." I coloured again as red as fire. "Then
thou hast dealt with the evil one, friend," said I very gravely. "No,
no," says she, "I have no familiar; but I tell thee I have found him for
thee, and his name is So-and-so, and he lives as above recited."

I was surprised again at this, not being able to imagine how she should
come to know all this. However, to put me out of pain, she told me what
she had done. "Well," said I, "thou art very kind, but this is not
worth thy pains; for now I know it, 'tis only to satisfy my curiosity;
for I shall not send to him upon any account." "Be that as thou wilt,"
says she. "Besides," added she, "thou art in the right to say so to me,
for why should I be trusted with it? Though, if I were, I assure thee I
should not betray thee." "That's very kind," said I, "and I believe
thee; and assure thyself, if I do send to him, thou shalt know it, and
be trusted with it too."

During this interval of five weeks I suffered a hundred thousand
perplexities of mind. I was thoroughly convinced I was right as to the
person, that it was the man. I knew him so well, and saw him so plain, I
could not be deceived. I drove out again in the coach (on pretence of
air) almost every day in hopes of seeing him again, but was never so
lucky as to see him; and now I had made the discovery I was as far to
seek what measures to take as I was before.

To send to him, or speak to him first if I should see him, so as to be
known to him, that I resolved not to do, if I died for it. To watch him
about his lodging, that was as much below my spirit as the other. So
that, in a word, I was at a perfect loss how to act or what to do.

At length came Amy's letter, with the last account which she had at
Rouen from the Dutch skipper, which, confirming the other, left me out
of doubt that this was my man; but still no human invention could bring
me to the speech of him in such a manner as would suit with my
resolutions. For, after all, how did I know what his circumstances were?
whether married or single? And if he had a wife, I knew he was so honest
a man he would not so much as converse with me, or so much as know me if
he met me in the street.

In the next place, as he entirely neglected me, which, in short, is the
worst way of slighting a woman, and had given no answer to my letters, I
did not know but he might be the same man still; so I resolved that I
could do nothing in it unless some fairer opportunity presented, which
might make my way clearer to me; for I was determined he should have no
room to put any more slights upon me.

In these thoughts I passed away near three months; till at last, being
impatient, I resolved to send for Amy to come over, and tell her how
things stood, and that I would do nothing till she came. Amy, in answer,
sent me word she would come away with all speed, but begged of me that I
would enter into no engagement with him, or anybody, till she arrived;
but still keeping me in the dark as to the thing itself which she had to
say; at which I was heartily vexed, for many reasons.

But while all these things were transacting, and letters and answers
passed between Amy and I a little slower than usual, at which I was not
so well pleased as I used to be with Amy's despatch--I say, in this time
the following scene opened.

It was one afternoon, about four o'clock, my friendly Quaker and I
sitting in her chamber upstairs, and very cheerful, chatting together
(for she was the best company in the world), when somebody ringing
hastily at the door, and no servant just then in the way, she ran down
herself to the door, when a gentleman appears, with a footman attending,
and making some apologies, which she did not thoroughly understand, he
speaking but broken English, he asked to speak with me, by the very same
name that I went by in her house, which, by the way, was not the name
that he had known me by.

She, with very civil language, in her way, brought him into a very
handsome parlour below stairs, and said she would go and see whether the
person who lodged in her house owned that name, and he should hear
farther.

I was a little surprised, even before I knew anything of who it was, my
mind foreboding the thing as it happened (whence that arises let the
naturalists explain to us); but I was frighted and ready to die when my
Quaker came up all gay and crowing. "There," says she, "is the Dutch
French merchant come to see thee." I could not speak one word to her nor
stir off of my chair, but sat as motionless as a statue. She talked a
thousand pleasant things to me, but they made no impression on me. At
last she pulled me and teased me. "Come, come," says she, "be thyself,
and rouse up. I must go down again to him; what shall I say to him?"
"Say," said I, "that you have no such body in the house." "That I
cannot do," says she, "because it is not the truth. Besides, I have
owned thou art above. Come, come, go down with me." "Not for a thousand
guineas," said I. "Well," says she, "I'll go and tell him thou wilt come
quickly." So, without giving me time to answer her, away she goes.

A million of thoughts circulated in my head while she was gone, and what
to do I could not tell; I saw no remedy but I must speak with him, but
would have given £500 to have shunned it; yet had I shunned it, perhaps
then I would have given £500 again that I had seen him. Thus fluctuating
and unconcluding were my thoughts, what I so earnestly desired I
declined when it offered itself; and what now I pretended to decline was
nothing but what I had been at the expense of £40 or £50 to send Amy to
France for, and even without any view, or, indeed, any rational
expectation of bringing it to pass; and what for half a year before I
was so uneasy about that I could not be quiet night or day till Amy
proposed to go over to inquire after him. In short, my thoughts were all
confused and in the utmost disorder. I had once refused and rejected
him, and I repented it heartily; then I had taken ill his silence, and
in my mind rejected him again, but had repented that too. Now I had
stooped so low as to send after him into France, which if he had known,
perhaps, he had never come after me; and should I reject him a third
time! On the other hand, he had repented too, in his turn, perhaps, and
not knowing how I had acted, either in stooping to send in search after
him or in the wickeder part of my life, was come over hither to seek me
again; and I might take him, perhaps, with the same advantages as I
might have done before, and would I now be backward to see him! Well,
while I was in this hurry my friend the Quaker comes up again, and
perceiving the confusion I was in, she runs to her closet and fetched me
a little pleasant cordial; but I would not taste it. "Oh," says she, "I
understand thee. Be not uneasy; I'll give thee something shall take off
all the smell of it; if he kisses thee a thousand times he shall be no
wiser." I thought to myself, "Thou art perfectly acquainted with affairs
of this nature; I think you must govern me now;" so I began to incline
to go down with her. Upon that I took the cordial, and she gave me a
kind of spicy preserve after it, whose flavour was so strong, and yet so
deliciously pleasant, that it would cheat the nicest smelling, and it
left not the least taint of the cordial on the breath.

Well, after this, though with some hesitation still, I went down a pair
of back-stairs with her, and into a dining-room, next to the parlour in
which he was; but there I halted, and desired she would let me consider
of it a little. "Well, do so," says she, and left me with more readiness
than she did before. "Do consider, and I'll come to thee again."

Though I hung back with an awkwardness that was really unfeigned, yet
when she so readily left me I thought it was not so kind, and I began to
think she should have pressed me still on to it; so foolishly backward
are we to the thing which, of all the world, we most desire; mocking
ourselves with a feigned reluctance, when the negative would be death to
us. But she was too cunning for me; for while I, as it were, blamed her
in my mind for not carrying me to him, though, at the same time, I
appeared backward to see him, on a sudden she unlocks the folding-doors,
which looked into the next parlour, and throwing them open. "There,"
says she (ushering him in), "is the person who, I suppose, thou
inquirest for;" and the same moment, with a kind decency, she retired,
and that so swift that she would not give us leave hardly to know which
way she went.

I stood up, but was confounded with a sudden inquiry in my thoughts how
I should receive him, and with a resolution as swift as lightning, in
answer to it, said to myself, "It shall be coldly." So on a sudden I put
on an air of stiffness and ceremony, and held it for about two minutes;
but it was with great difficulty.

He restrained himself too, on the other hand, came towards me gravely,
and saluted me in form; but it was, it seems, upon his supposing the
Quaker was behind him, whereas she, as I said, understood things too
well, and had retired as if she had vanished, that we might have full
freedom; for, as she said afterwards, she supposed we had seen one
another before, though it might have been a great while ago.

Whatever stiffness I had put on my behaviour to him, I was surprised in
my mind, and angry at his, and began to wonder what kind of a
ceremonious meeting it was to be. However, after he perceived the woman
was gone he made a kind of a hesitation, looking a little round him.
"Indeed," said he, "I thought the gentlewoman was not withdrawn;" and
with that he took me in his arms and kissed me three or four times; but
I, that was prejudiced to the last degree with the coldness of his first
salutes, when I did not know the cause of it, could not be thoroughly
cleared of the prejudice though I did know the cause, and thought that
even his return, and taking me in his arms, did not seem to have the
same ardour with which he used to receive me, and this made me behave to
him awkwardly, and I know not how for a good while; but this by the way.

He began with a kind of an ecstasy upon the subject of his finding me
out; how it was possible that he should have been four years in England,
and had used all the ways imaginable, and could never so much as have
the least intimation of me, or of any one like me; and that it was now
above two years that he had despaired of it, and had given over all
inquiry; and that now he should chop upon me, as it were, unlooked and
unsought for.

I could easily have accounted for his not finding me if I had but set
down the detail of my real retirement; but I gave it a new, and indeed a
truly hypocritical turn. I told him that any one that knew the manner
of life I led might account for his not finding me; that the retreat I
had taken up would have rendered it a hundred thousand to one odds that
he ever found me at all; that, as I had abandoned all conversation,
taken up another name, lived remote from London, and had not preserved
one acquaintance in it, it was no wonder he had not met with me; that
even my dress would let him see that I did not desire to be known by
anybody.

Then he asked if I had not received some letters from him. I told him
no, he had not thought fit to give me the civility of an answer to the
last I wrote to him, and he could not suppose I should expect a return
after a silence in a case where I had laid myself so low and exposed
myself in a manner I had never been used to; that indeed I had never
sent for any letters after that to the place where I had ordered his to
be directed; and that, being so justly, as I thought, punished for my
weakness, I had nothing to do but to repent of being a fool, after I had
strictly adhered to a just principle before; that, however, as what I
did was rather from motions of gratitude than from real weakness,
however it might be construed by him, I had the satisfaction in myself
of having fully discharged the debt. I added, that I had not wanted
occasions of all the seeming advancements which the pretended felicity
of a marriage life was usually set off with, and might have been what I
desired not to name; but that, however low I had stooped to him, I had
maintained the dignity of female liberty against all the attacks either
of pride or avarice; and that I had been infinitely obliged to him for
giving me an opportunity to discharge the only obligation that
endangered me, without subjecting me to the consequence; and that I
hoped he was satisfied I had paid the debt by offering myself to be
chained, but was infinitely debtor to him another way for letting me
remain free.

He was so confounded at this discourse that he knew not what to say, and
for a good while he stood mute indeed; but recovering himself a little,
he said I run out into a discourse he hoped was over and forgotten, and
he did not intend to revive it; that he knew I had not had his letters,
for that, when he first came to England, he had been at the place to
which they were directed, and found them all lying there but one, and
that the people had not known how to deliver them; that he thought to
have had a direction there how to find me, but had the mortification to
be told that they did not so much as know who I was; that he was under a
great disappointment; and that I ought to know, in answer to all my
resentments, that he had done a long and, he hoped, a sufficient penance
for the slight that I had supposed he had put upon me; that it was true
(and I could not suppose any other) that upon the repulse I had given
them in a case so circumstanced as his was, and after such earnest
entreaties and such offers as he had made me, he went away with a mind
heartily grieved and full of resentment; that he had looked back on the
crime he had committed with some regret, but on the cruelty of my
treatment of the poor infant I went with at that time with the utmost
detestation, and that this made him unable to send an agreeable answer
to me; for which reason he had sent none at all for some time; but that
in about six or seven months, those resentments wearing off by the
return of his affection to me and his concern in the poor child ----.
There he stopped, and indeed tears stood in his eyes; while in a
parenthesis he only added, and to this minute he did not know whether it
was dead or alive. He then went on: Those resentments wearing off, he
sent me several letters--I think he said seven or eight--but received no
answer; that then his business obliging him to go to Holland, he came to
England, as in his way, but found, as above, that his letters had not
been called for, but that he left them at the house after paying the
postage of them; and going then back to France, he was yet uneasy, and
could not refrain the knight-errantry of coming to England again to seek
me, though he knew neither where or of who to inquire for me, being
disappointed in all his inquiries before; that he had yet taken up his
residence here, firmly believing that one time or other he should meet
me, or hear of me, and that some kind chance would at last throw him in
my way; that he had lived thus above four years, and though his hopes
were vanished, yet he had not any thoughts of removing any more in the
world, unless it should be at last, as it is with other old men, he
might have some inclination to go home to die in his own country, but
that he had not thought of it yet; that if I would consider all these
steps, I would find some reasons to forget his first resentments, and to
think that penance, as he called it, which he had undergone in search of
me an _amende honorable_, in reparation of the affront given to the
kindness of my letter of invitation; and that we might at last make
ourselves some satisfaction on both sides for the mortifications past.

I confess I could not hear all this without being moved very much, and
yet I continued a little stiff and formal too a good while. I told him
that before I could give him any reply to the rest of his discourse I
ought to give him the satisfaction of telling him that his son was
alive, and that indeed, since I saw him so concerned about it, and
mention it with such affection, I was sorry that I had not found out
some way or other to let him know it sooner; but that I thought, after
his slighting the mother, as above, he had summed up his affection to
the child in the letter he had wrote to me about providing for it; and
that he had, as other fathers often do, looked upon it as a birth which,
being out of the way, was to be forgotten, as its beginning was to be
repented of; that in providing sufficiently for it he had done more than
all such fathers used to do, and might be well satisfied with it.

He answered me that he should have been very glad if I had been so good
but to have given him the satisfaction of knowing the poor unfortunate
creature was yet alive, and he would have taken some care of it upon
himself, and particularly by owning it for a legitimate child, which,
where nobody had known to the contrary, would have taken off the infamy
which would otherwise cleave to it, and so the child should not itself
have known anything of its own disaster; but that he feared it was now
too late.

He added that I might see by all his conduct since that what unhappy
mistake drew him into the thing at first, and that he would have been
very far from doing the injury to me, or being instrumental to add _une
miserable_ (that was his word) to the world, if he had not been drawn
into it by the hopes he had of making me his own; but that, if it was
possible to rescue the child from the consequences of its unhappy birth,
he hoped I would give him leave to do it, and he would let me see that
he had both means and affection still to do it; and that,
notwithstanding all the misfortunes that had befallen him, nothing that
belonged to him, especially by a mother he had such a concern for as he
had for me, should ever want what he was in a condition to do for it.

I could not hear this without being sensibly touched with it. I was
ashamed that he should show that he had more real affection for the
child, though he had never seen it in his life, than I that bore it, for
indeed I did not love the child, nor love to see it; and though I had
provided for it, yet I did it by Amy's hand, and had not seen it above
twice in four years, being privately resolved that when it grew up it
should not be able to call me mother.

However, I told him the child was taken care of, and that he need not be
anxious about it, unless he suspected that I had less affection for it
than he that had never seen it in his life; that he knew what I had
promised him to do for it, namely, to give it the thousand pistoles
which I had offered him, and which he had declined; that I assured him I
had made my will, and that I had left it £5000, and the interest of it
till he should come of age, if I died before that time; that I would
still be as good as that to it; but if he had a mind to take it from me
into his government, I would not be against it; and to satisfy him that
I would perform what I said, I would cause the child to be delivered to
him, and the £5000 also for its support, depending upon it that he would
show himself a father to it by what I saw of his affection to it now.

I had observed that he had hinted two or three times in his discourse,
his having had misfortunes in the world, and I was a little surprised at
the expression, especially at the repeating it so often; but I took no
notice of that part yet.

He thanked me for my kindness to the child with a tenderness which
showed the sincerity of all he had said before, and which increased the
regret with which, as I said, I looked back on the little affection I
had showed to the poor child. He told me he did not desire to take him
from me, but so as to introduce him into the world as his own, which he
could still do, having lived absent from his other children (for he had
two sons and a daughter which were brought up at Nimeguen, in Holland,
with a sister of his) so long that he might very well send another son
of ten years old to be bred up with them, and suppose his mother to be
dead or alive, as he found occasion; and that, as I had resolved to do
so handsomely for the child, he would add to it something considerable,
though, having had some great disappointments (repeating the words), he
could not do for it as he would otherwise have done.

I then thought myself obliged to take notice of his having so often
mentioned his having met with disappointments. I told him I was very
sorry to hear he had met with anything afflicting to him in the world;
that I would not have anything belonging to me add to his loss, or
weaken him in what he might do for his other children; and that I would
not agree to his having the child away, though the proposal was
infinitely to the child's advantage, unless he would promise me that the
whole expense should be mine, and that, if he did not think £5000 enough
for the child, I would give it more.

We had so much discourse upon this and the old affairs that it took up
all our time at his first visit. I was a little importunate with him to
tell me how he came to find me out, but he put it off for that time,
and only obtaining my leave to visit me again, he went away; and indeed
my heart was so full with what he had said already that I was glad when
he went away. Sometimes I was full of tenderness and affection for him,
and especially when he expressed himself so earnestly and passionately
about the child; other times I was crowded with doubts about his
circumstances. Sometimes I was terrified with apprehensions lest, if I
should come into a close correspondence with him, he should any way come
to hear what kind of life I had led at Pall Mall and in other places,
and it might make me miserable afterwards; from which last thought I
concluded that I had better repulse him again than receive him. All
these thoughts, and many more, crowded in so fast, I say, upon me that I
wanted to give vent to them and get rid of him, and was very glad when
he was gone away.

We had several meetings after this, in which still we had so many
preliminaries to go through that we scarce ever bordered upon the main
subject. Once, indeed, he said something of it, and I put it off with a
kind of a jest. "Alas!" says I, "those things are out of the question
now; 'tis almost two ages since those things were talked between us,"
says I. "You see I am grown an old woman since that." Another time he
gave a little push at it again, and I laughed again. "Why, what dost
thou talk of?" said I in a formal way. "Dost thou not see I am turned
Quaker? I cannot speak of those things now." "Why," says he, "the
Quakers marry as well as other people, and love one another as well.
Besides," says he, "the Quakers' dress does not ill become you," and so
jested with me again, and so it went off for a third time. However, I
began to be kind to him in process of time, as they call it, and we grew
very intimate; and if the following accident had not unluckily
intervened, I had certainly married him, or consented to marry him, the
very next time he had asked me.

I had long waited for a letter from Amy, who, it seems, was just at that
time gone to Rouen the second time, to make her inquiries about him; and
I received a letter from her at this unhappy juncture, which gave me the
following account of my business:--

I. That for my gentleman, who I had now, as I may say, in my arms, she
said he had been gone from Paris, as I have hinted, having met with some
great losses and misfortunes; that he had been in Holland on that very
account, whither he had also carried his children; that he was after
that settled for some time at Rouen; that she had been at Rouen, and
found there (by a mere accident), from a Dutch skipper, that he was at
London, had been there above three years; that he was to be found upon
the Exchange, on the French walk; and that he lodged at St. Laurence
Pountney's Lane, and the like; so Amy said she supposed I might soon
find him out, but that she doubted he was poor, and not worth looking
after. This she did because of the next clause, which the jade had most
mind to on many accounts.

II. That as to the Prince ----; that, as above, he was gone into
Germany, where his estate lay; that he had quitted the French service,
and lived retired; that she had seen his gentleman, who remained at
Paris to solicit his arrears, &c.; that he had given her an account how
his lord had employed him to inquire for me and find me out, as above,
and told her what pains he had taken to find me; that he had understood
that I was gone to England; that he once had orders to go to England to
find me; that his lord had resolved, if he could have found me, to have
called me a countess, and so have married me, and have carried me into
Germany with him; and that his commission was still to assure me that
the prince would marry me if I would come to him, and that he would send
him an account that he had found me, and did not doubt but he would have
orders to come over to England to attend me in a figure suitable to my
quality.

Amy, an ambitious jade, who knew my weakest part--namely, that I loved
great things, and that I loved to be flattered and courted--said
abundance of kind things upon this occasion, which she knew were
suitable to me and would prompt my vanity; and talked big of the
prince's gentleman having orders to come over to me with a procuration
to marry me by proxy (as princes usually do in like cases), and to
furnish me with an equipage, and I know not how many fine things; but
told me, withal, that she had not yet let him know that she belonged to
me still, or that she knew where to find me, or to write to me; because
she was willing to see the bottom of it, and whether it was a reality or
a gasconade. She had indeed told him that, if he had any such
commission, she would endeavour to find me out, but no more.

III. For the Jew, she assured me that she had not been able to come at a
certainty what was become of him, or in what part of the world he was;
but that thus much she had learned from good hands, that he had
committed a crime, in being concerned in a design to rob a rich banker
at Paris; and that he was fled, and had not been heard of there for
above six years.

IV. For that of my husband, the brewer, she learned, that being
commanded into the field upon an occasion of some action in Flanders, he
was wounded at the battle of Mons, and died of his wounds in the
Hospital of the Invalids; so there was an end of my four inquiries,
which I sent her over to make.

This account of the prince, and the return of his affection to me, with
all the flattering great things which seemed to come along with it; and
especially as they came gilded and set out by my maid Amy--I say this
account of the prince came to me in a very unlucky hour, and in the very
crisis of my affair.

The merchant and I had entered into close conferences upon the grand
affair. I had left off talking my platonics, and of my independency, and
being a free woman, as before; and he having cleared up my doubts too,
as to his circumstances and the misfortunes he had spoken of, I had gone
so far that we had begun to consider where we should live, and in what
figure, what equipage, what house, and the like.

I had made some harangues upon the delightful retirement of a country
life, and how we might enjoy ourselves so effectually without the
encumbrances of business and the world; but all this was grimace, and
purely because I was afraid to make any public appearance in the world,
for fear some impertinent person of quality should chop upon me again
and cry out, "Roxana, Roxana, by ----!" with an oath, as had been done
before.

My merchant, bred to business and used to converse among men of
business, could hardly tell how to live without it; at least it appeared
he should be like a fish out of water, uneasy and dying. But, however,
he joined with me; only argued that we might live as near London as we
could, that he might sometimes come to 'Change and hear how the world
should go abroad, and how it fared with his friends and his children.

I answered that if he chose still to embarrass himself with business, I
supposed it would be more to his satisfaction to be in his own country,
and where his family was so well known, and where his children also
were.

He smiled at the thoughts of that, and let me know that he should be
very willing to embrace such an offer; but that he could not expect it
of me, to whom England was, to be sure, so naturalised now as that it
would be carrying me out of my native country, which he would not desire
by any means, however agreeable it might be to him.

I told him he was mistaken in me; that as I had told him so much of a
married state being a captivity, and the family being a house of
bondage, that when I married I expected to be but an upper servant; so,
if I did notwithstanding submit to it, I hoped he should see I knew how
to act the servant's part, and do everything to oblige my master; that
if I did not resolve to go with him wherever he desired to go, he might
depend I would never have him. "And did I not," said I, "offer myself to
go with you to the East Indies?"

All this while this was indeed but a copy of my countenance; for, as my
circumstances would not admit of my stay in London, at least not so as
to appear publicly, I resolved, if I took him, to live remote in the
country, or go out of England with him.

But in an evil hour, just now came Amy's letter, in the very middle of
all these discourses; and the fine things she had said about the prince
began to make strange work with me. The notion of being a princess, and
going over to live where all that had happened here would have been
quite sunk out of knowledge as well as out of memory (conscience
excepted), was mighty taking. The thoughts of being surrounded with
domestics, honoured with titles, be called her Highness, and live in all
the splendour of a court, and, which was still more, in the arms of a
man of such rank, and who, I knew, loved and valued me--all this, in a
word, dazzled my eyes, turned my head, and I was as truly crazed and
distracted for about a fortnight as most of the people in Bedlam, though
perhaps not quite so far gone.

When my gentleman came to me the next time I had no notion of him; I
wished I had never received him at all. In short, I resolved to have no
more to say to him, so I feigned myself indisposed; and though I did
come down to him and speak to him a little, yet I let him see that I was
so ill that I was (as we say) no company, and that it would be kind in
him to give me leave to quit him for that time.

The next morning he sent a footman to inquire how I did; and I let him
know I had a violent cold, and was very ill with it. Two days after he
came again, and I let him see me again, but feigned myself so hoarse
that I could not speak to be heard, and that it was painful to me but to
whisper; and, in a word, I held him in this suspense near three weeks.

During this time I had a strange elevation upon my mind; and the prince,
or the spirit of him, had such a possession of me that I spent most of
this time in the realising all the great things of a life with the
prince, to my mind pleasing my fancy with the grandeur I was supposing
myself to enjoy, and with wickedly studying in what manner to put off
this gentleman and be rid of him for ever.

I cannot but say that sometimes the baseness of the action stuck hard
with me; the honour and sincerity with which he had always treated me,
and, above all, the fidelity he had showed me at Paris, and that I owed
my life to him--I say, all these stared in my face, and I frequently
argued with myself upon the obligation I was under to him, and how base
would it be now too, after so many obligations and engagements, to cast
him off.

But the title of highness, and of a princess, and all those fine things,
as they came in, weighed down all this; and the sense of gratitude
vanished as if it had been a shadow.

At other times I considered the wealth I was mistress of; that I was
able to live like a princess, though not a princess; and that my
merchant (for he had told me all the affair of his misfortunes) was far
from being poor, or even mean; that together we were able to make up an
estate of between three and four thousand pounds a year, which was in
itself equal to some princes abroad. But though this was true, yet the
name of princess, and the flutter of it--in a word, the pride--weighed
them down; and all these arguings generally ended to the disadvantage of
my merchant; so that, in short, I resolved to drop him, and give him a
final answer at his next coming; namely, that something had happened in
my affairs which had caused me to alter my measures unexpectedly, and,
in a word, to desire him to trouble himself no farther.

I think, verily, this rude treatment of him was for some time the effect
of a violent fermentation in my blood; for the very motion which the
steady contemplation of my fancied greatness had put my spirits into had
thrown me into a kind of fever, and I scarce knew what I did.

I have wondered since that it did not make me mad; nor do I now think it
strange to hear of those who have been quite lunatic with their pride,
that fancied themselves queens and empresses, and have made their
attendants serve them upon the knee, given visitors their hand to kiss,
and the like; for certainly, if pride will not turn the brain, nothing
can.

However, the next time my gentleman came, I had not courage enough, or
not ill nature enough, to treat him in the rude manner I had resolved to
do, and it was very well I did not; for soon after, I had another letter
from Amy, in which was the mortifying news, and indeed surprising to me,
that my prince (as I, with a secret pleasure, had called him) was very
much hurt by a bruise he had received in hunting and engaging with a
wild boar, a cruel and desperate sport which the noblemen of Germany, it
seems, much delight in.

This alarmed me indeed, and the more because Amy wrote me word that his
gentleman was gone away express to him, not without apprehensions that
he should find his master was dead before his coming home; but that he
(the gentleman) had promised her that as soon as he arrived he would
send back the same courier to her with an account of his master's
health, and of the main affair; and that he had obliged Amy to stay at
Paris fourteen days for his return; she having promised him before to
make it her business to go to England and to find me out for his lord if
he sent her such orders; and he was to send her a bill for fifty
pistoles for her journey. So Amy told me she waited for the answer.

This was a blow to me several ways; for, first, I was in a state of
uncertainty as to his person, whether he was alive or dead; and I was
not unconcerned in that part, I assure you; for I had an inexpressible
affection remaining for his person, besides the degree to which it was
revived by the view of a firmer interest in him. But this was not all,
for in losing him I forever lost the prospect of all the gaiety and
glory that had made such an impression upon my imagination.

In this state of uncertainty, I say, by Amy's letter, I was like still
to remain another fortnight; and had I now continued the resolution of
using my merchant in the rude manner I once intended, I had made perhaps
a sorry piece of work of it indeed, and it was very well my heart failed
me as it did.

However, I treated him with a great many shuffles, and feigned stories
to keep him off from any closer conferences than we had already had,
that I might act afterwards as occasion might offer, one way or other.
But that which mortified me most was, that Amy did not write, though the
fourteen days were expired. At last, to my great surprise, when I was,
with the utmost impatience, looking out at the window, expecting the
postman that usually brought the foreign letters--I say I was agreeably
surprised to see a coach come to the yard-gate where we lived, and my
woman Amy alight out of it and come towards the door, having the
coachman bringing several bundles after her.

I flew like lightning downstairs to speak to her, but was soon damped
with her news. "Is the prince alive or dead, Amy?" says I. She spoke
coldly and slightly. "He is alive, madam," said she. "But it is not much
matter; I had as lieu he had been dead." So we went upstairs again to my
chamber, and there we began a serious discourse of the whole matter.

First, she told me a long story of his being hurt by a wild boar, and of
the condition he was reduced to, so that every one expected he should
die, the anguish of the wound having thrown him into a fever, with
abundance of circumstances too long to relate here; how he recovered of
that extreme danger, but continued very weak; how the gentleman had been
_homme de parole_, and had sent back the courier as punctually as if it
had been to the king; that he had given a long account of his lord, and
of his illness and recovery; but the sum of the matter, as to me, was,
that as to the lady, his lord was turned penitent, was under some vows
for his recovery, and could not think any more on that affair; and
especially, the lady being gone, and that it had not been offered to
her, so there was no breach of honour; but that his lord was sensible of
the good offices of Mrs. Amy, and had sent her the fifty pistoles for
her trouble, as if she had really gone the journey.

I was, I confess, hardly able to bear the first surprise of this
disappointment. Amy saw it, and gapes out (as was her way), "Lawd,
madam! never be concerned at it; you see he is gotten among the priests,
and I suppose they have saucily imposed some penance upon him, and, it
may be, sent him of an errand barefoot to some Madonna or Nôtredame, or
other; and he is off of his amours for the present. I'll warrant you
he'll be as wicked again as ever he was when he is got thorough well,
and gets but out of their hands again. I hate this out-o'-season
repentance. What occasion had he, in his repentance, to be off of taking
a good wife? I should have been glad to see you have been a princess,
and all that; but if it can't be, never afflict yourself; you are rich
enough to be a princess to yourself; you don't want him, that's the best
of it."

Well, I cried for all that, and was heartily vexed, and that a great
while; but as Amy was always at my elbow, and always jogging it out of
my head with her mirth and her wit, it wore off again.

Then I told Amy all the story of my merchant, and how he had found me
out when I was in such a concern to find him; how it was true that he
lodged in St. Laurence Pountney's Lane; and how I had had all the story
of his misfortune, which she had heard of, in which he had lost above
£8000 sterling; and that he had told me frankly of it before she had
sent me any account of it, or at least before I had taken any notice
that I had heard of it.

Amy was very joyful at that part. "Well, madam, then," says Amy, "what
need you value the story of the prince, and going I know not whither
into Germany to lay your bones in another world, and learn the devil's
language, called High Dutch? You are better here by half," says Amy.
"Lawd, madam!" says she; "why, are you not as rich as Croesus?"

Well, it was a great while still before I could bring myself off of this
fancied sovereignty; and I, that was so willing once to be mistress to a
king, was now ten thousand times more fond of being wife to a prince.

So fast a hold has pride and ambition upon our minds, that when once it
gets admission, nothing is so chimerical but, under this possession, we
can form ideas of in our fancy and realise to our imagination. Nothing
can be so ridiculous as the simple steps we take in such cases; a man or
a woman becomes a mere _malade imaginaire_, and, I believe, may as
easily die with grief or run mad with joy (as the affair in his fancy
appears right or wrong) as if all was real, and actually under the
management of the person.

I had indeed two assistants to deliver me from this snare, and these
were, first, Amy, who knew my disease, but was able to do nothing as to
the remedy; the second, the merchant, who really brought the remedy, but
knew nothing of the distemper.

I remember, when all these disorders were upon my thoughts, in one of
the visits my friend the merchant made me, he took notice that he
perceived I was under some unusual disorder; he believed, he said, that
my distemper, whatever it was, lay much in my head, and it being summer
weather and very hot, proposed to me to go a little way into the air.

I started at his expression. "What!" says I; "do you think, then, that I
am crazed? You should, then, propose a madhouse for my cure." "No, no,"
says he, "I do not mean anything like that; I hope the head may be
distempered and not the brain." Well, I was too sensible that he was
right, for I knew I had acted a strange, wild kind of part with him; but
he insisted upon it, and pressed me to go into the country. I took him
short again. "What need you," says I, "send me out of your way? It is in
your power to be less troubled with me, and with less inconvenience to
us both."

He took that ill, and told me I used to have a better opinion of his
sincerity, and desired to know what he had done to forfeit my charity.
I mention this only to let you see how far I had gone in my measures of
quitting him--that is to say, how near I was of showing him how base,
ungrateful, and how vilely I could act; but I found I had carried the
jest far enough, and that a little matter might have made him sick of me
again, as he was before; so I began by little and little to change my
way of talking to him, and to come to discourse to the purpose again as
we had done before.

A while after this, when we were very merry and talking familiarly
together, he called me, with an air of particular satisfaction, his
princess. I coloured at the word, for it indeed touched me to the quick;
but he knew nothing of the reason of my being touched with it. "What
d'ye mean by that?" said I. "Nay," says he, "I mean nothing but that you
are a princess to me." "Well," says I, "as to that I am content, and yet
I could tell you I might have been a princess if I would have quitted
you, and believe I could be so still." "It is not in my power to make
you a princess," says he, "but I can easily make you a lady here in
England, and a countess too if you will go out of it."

I heard both with a great deal of satisfaction, for my pride remained
though it had been balked, and I thought with myself that this proposal
would make me some amends for the loss of the title that had so tickled
my imagination another way, and I was impatient to understand what he
meant, but I would not ask him by any means; so it passed off for that
time.

When he was gone I told Amy what he had said, and Amy was as impatient
to know the manner how it could be as I was; but the next time
(perfectly unexpected to me) he told me that he had accidentally
mentioned a thing to me last time he was with me, having not the least
thought of the thing itself; but not knowing but such a thing might be
of some weight to me, and that it might bring me respect among people
where I might appear, he had thought since of it, and was resolved to
ask me about it.

I made light of it, and told him that, as he knew I had chosen a retired
life, it was of no value to me to be called lady or countess either; but
that if he intended to drag me, as I might call it, into the world
again, perhaps it might be agreeable to him; but, besides that, I could
not judge of the thing, because I did not understand how either of them
was to be done.

He told me that money purchased titles of honour in almost all parts of
the world, though money could not give principles of honour, they must
come by birth and blood; that, however, titles sometimes assist to
elevate the soul and to infuse generous principles into the mind, and
especially where there was a good foundation laid in the persons; that
he hoped we should neither of us misbehave if we came to it; and that as
we knew how to wear a title without undue elevations, so it might sit as
well upon us as on another; that as to England, he had nothing to do
but to get an act of naturalisation in his favour, and he knew where to
purchase a patent for baronet--that is say, to have the honour and title
transferred to him; but if I intended to go abroad with him, he had a
nephew, the son of his eldest brother, who had the title of count, with
the estate annexed, which was but small, and that he had frequently
offered to make it over to him for a thousand pistoles, which was not a
great deal of money, and considering it was in the family already, he
would, upon my being willing, purchase it immediately.

I told him I liked the last best, but then I would not let him buy it
unless he would let me pay the thousand pistoles. "No, no," says he, "I
refused a thousand pistoles that I had more right to have accepted than
that, and you shall not be at so much expense now." "Yes," says I, "you
did refuse it, and perhaps repented it afterwards." "I never
complained," said he. "But I did," says I, "and often repented it for
you." "I do not understand you," says he. "Why," said I, "I repented
that I suffered you to refuse it." "Well, well," said he, "we may talk
of that hereafter, when you shall resolve which part of the world you
will make your settled residence in." Here he talked very handsomely to
me, and for a good while together; how it had been his lot to live all
his days out of his native country, and to be often shifting and
changing the situation of his affairs; and that I myself had not always
had a fixed abode, but that now, as neither of us was very young, he
fancied I would be for taking up our abode where, if possible, we might
remove no more; that as to his part, he was of that opinion entirely,
only with this exception, that the choice of the place should be mine,
for that all places in the world were alike to him, only with this
single addition, namely, that I was with him.

I heard him with a great deal of pleasure, as well for his being willing
to give me the choice as for that I resolved to live abroad, for the
reason I have mentioned already, namely, lest I should at any time be
known in England, and all that story of Roxana and the balls should come
out; as also I was not a little tickled with the satisfaction of being
still a countess, though I could not be a princess.

I told Amy all this story, for she was still my privy councillor; but
when I asked her opinion, she made me laugh heartily. "Now, which of the
two shall I take, Amy?" said I. "Shall I be a lady--that is, a baronet's
lady in England, or a countess in Holland?" The ready-witted jade, that
knew the pride of my temper too, almost as well as I did myself,
answered (without the least hesitation), "Both, madam. Which of them?"
says she (repeating the words). "Why not both of them? and then you will
be really a princess; for, sure, to be a lady in English and a countess
in Dutch may make a princess in High Dutch." Upon the whole, though Amy
was in jest, she put the thought into my head, and I resolved that, in
short, I would be both of them, which I managed as you shall hear.

First, I seemed to resolve that I would live and settle in England, only
with this condition, namely, that I would not live in London. I
pretended that it would choke me up; that I wanted breath when I was in
London, but that anywhere else I would be satisfied; and then I asked
him whether any seaport town in England would not suit him; because I
knew, though he seemed to leave off, he would always love to be among
business, and conversing with men of business; and I named several
places, either nearest for business with France or with Holland; as
Dover or Southampton, for the first; and Ipswich, or Yarmouth, or Hull
for the last; but I took care that we would resolve upon nothing; only
by this it seemed to be certain that we should live in England.

It was time now to bring things to a conclusion, and so in about six
weeks' time more we settled all our preliminaries; and, among the rest,
he let me know that he should have the bill for his naturalisation
passed time enough, so that he would be (as he called it) an Englishman
before we married. That was soon perfected, the Parliament being then
sitting, and several other foreigners joining in the said bill to save
the expense.

It was not above three or four days after, but that, without giving me
the least notice that he had so much as been about the patent for
baronet, he brought it me in a fine embroidered bag, and saluting me by
the name of my Lady ---- (joining his own surname to it), presented it
to me with his picture set with diamonds, and at the same time gave me a
breast-jewel worth a thousand pistoles, and the next morning we were
married. Thus I put an end to all the intriguing part of my life--a life
full of prosperous wickedness; the reflections upon which were so much
the more afflicting as the time had been spent in the grossest crimes,
which, the more I looked back upon, the more black and horrid they
appeared, effectually drinking up all the comfort and satisfaction which
I might otherwise have taken in that part of life which was still before
me.

The first satisfaction, however, that I took in the new condition I was
in was in reflecting that at length the life of crime was over, and that
I was like a passenger coming back from the Indies, who, having, after
many years' fatigues and hurry in business, gotten a good estate, with
innumerable difficulties and hazards, is arrived safe at London with all
his effects, and has the pleasure of saying he shall never venture upon
the seas any more.

When we were married we came back immediately to my lodgings (for the
church was but just by), and we were so privately married that none but
Amy and my friend the Quaker was acquainted with it. As soon as we came
into the house he took me in his arms, and kissing me, "Now you are my
own," says he. "Oh that you had been so good to have done this eleven
years ago!" "Then," said I, "you, perhaps, would have been tired of me
long ago; it is much better now, for now all our happy days are to come.
Besides," said I, "I should not have been half so rich;" but that I said
to myself, for there was no letting him into the reason of it. "Oh!"
says he, "I should not have been tired of you; but, besides having the
satisfaction of your company, it had saved me that unlucky blow at
Paris, which was a dead loss to me of above eight thousand pistoles, and
all the fatigues of so many years' hurry and business;" and then he
added, "But I'll make you pay for it all, now I have you." I started a
little at the words. "Ay," said I, "do you threaten already? Pray what
d'ye mean by that?" and began to look a little grave.

"I'll tell you," says he, "very plainly what I mean;" and still he held
me fast in his arms. "I intend from this time never to trouble myself
with any more business, so I shall never get one shilling for you more
than I have already; all that you will lose one way. Next, I intend not
to trouble myself with any of the care or trouble of managing what
either you have for me or what I have to add to it; but you shall e'en
take it all upon yourself, as the wives do in Holland; so you will pay
for it that way too, for all the drudgery shall be yours. Thirdly, I
intend to condemn you to the constant bondage of my impertinent company,
for I shall tie you like a pedlar's pack at my back. I shall scarce
ever be from you; for I am sure I can take delight in nothing else in
this world." "Very well," says I; "but I am pretty heavy. I hope you'll
set me down sometimes when you are aweary." "As for that," says he,
"tire me if you can."

This was all jest and allegory; but it was all true, in the moral of the
fable, as you shall hear in its place. We were very merry the rest of
the day, but without any noise or clutter; for he brought not one of his
acquaintance or friends, either English or foreigner. The honest Quaker
provided us a very noble dinner indeed, considering how few we were to
eat it; and every day that week she did the like, and would at last have
it be all at her own charge, which I was utterly averse to; first,
because I knew her circumstances not to be very great, though not very
low; and next, because she had been so true a friend, and so cheerful a
comforter to me, ay, and counsellor too, in all this affair, that I had
resolved to make her a present that should be some help to her when all
was over.

But to return to the circumstances of our wedding. After being very
merry, as I have told you, Amy and the Quaker put us to bed, the honest
Quaker little thinking we had been abed together eleven years before.
Nay, that was a secret which, as it happened, Amy herself did not know.
Amy grinned and made faces, as if she had been pleased; but it came out
in so many words, when he was not by, the sum of her mumbling and
muttering was, that this should have been done ten or a dozen years
before; that it would signify little now; that was to say, in short,
that her mistress was pretty near fifty, and too old to have any
children. I chid her; the Quaker laughed, complimented me upon my not
being so old as Amy pretended, that I could not be above forty, and
might have a house full of children yet. But Amy and I too knew better
than she how it was, for, in short, I was old enough to have done
breeding, however I looked; but I made her hold her tongue.

In the morning my Quaker landlady came and visited us before we were up,
and made us eat cakes and drink chocolate in bed; and then left us
again, and bid us take a nap upon it, which I believe we did. In short,
she treated us so handsomely, and with such an agreeable cheerfulness,
as well as plenty, as made it appear to me that Quakers may, and that
this Quaker did, understand good manners as well as any other people.

I resisted her offer, however, of treating us for the whole week; and I
opposed it so long that I saw evidently that she took it ill, and would
have thought herself slighted if we had not accepted it. So I said no
more, but let her go on, only told her I would be even with her; and so
I was. However, for that week she treated us as she said she would, and
did it so very fine, and with such a profusion of all sorts of good
things, that the greatest burthen to her was how to dispose of things
that were left; for she never let anything, how dainty or however large,
be so much as seen twice among us.

I had some servants indeed, which helped her off a little; that is to
say, two maids, for Amy was now a woman of business, not a servant, and
ate always with us. I had also a coachman and a boy. My Quaker had a
man-servant too, but had but one maid; but she borrowed two more of some
of her friends for the occasion, and had a man-cook for dressing the
victuals.

She was only at a loss for plate, which she gave me a whisper of; and I
made Amy fetch a large strong-box, which I had lodged in a safe hand, in
which was all the fine plate which I had provided on a worse occasion,
as is mentioned before; and I put it into the Quaker's hand, obliging
her not to use it as mine, but as her own, for a reason I shall mention
presently.

I was now my Lady ----, and I must own I was exceedingly pleased with
it; 'twas so big and so great to hear myself called "her ladyship," and
"your ladyship," and the like, that I was like the Indian king at
Virginia, who, having a house built for him by the English, and a lock
put upon the door, would sit whole days together with the key in his
hand, locking and unlocking, and double-locking, the door, with an
unaccountable pleasure at the novelty; so I could have sat a whole day
together to hear Amy talk to me, and call me "your ladyship" at every
word; but after a while the novelty wore off and the pride of it abated,
till at last truly I wanted the other title as much as I did that of
ladyship before.

We lived this week in all the innocent mirth imaginable, and our
good-humoured Quaker was so pleasant in her way that it was particularly
entertaining to us. We had no music at all, or dancing; only I now and
then sung a French song to divert my spouse, who desired it, and the
privacy of our mirth greatly added to the pleasure of it. I did not make
many clothes for my wedding, having always a great many rich clothes by
me, which, with a little altering for the fashion, were perfectly new.
The next day he pressed me to dress, though we had no company. At last,
jesting with him, I told him I believed I was able to dress me so, in
one kind of dress that I had by me, that he would not know his wife when
he saw her, especially if anybody else was by. No, he said, that was
impossible, and he longed to see that dress. I told him I would dress me
in it, if he would promise me never to desire me to appear in it before
company. He promised he would not, but wanted to know why too; as
husbands, you know, are inquisitive creatures, and love to inquire after
anything they think is kept from them; but I had an answer ready for
him. "Because," said I, "it is not a decent dress in this country, and
would not look modest." Neither, indeed, would it, for it was but one
degree off from appearing in one's shift, but was the usual wear in the
country where they were used. He was satisfied with my answer, and gave
me his promise never to ask me to be seen in it before company. I then
withdrew, taking only Amy and the Quaker with me; and Amy dressed me in
my old Turkish habit which I danced in formerly, &c., as before. The
Quaker was charmed with the dress, and merrily said, that if such a
dress should come to be worn here, she should not know what to do; she
should be tempted not to dress in the Quaker's way any more.

When all the dress was put on, I loaded it with jewels, and in
particular I placed the large breast-jewel which he had given me of a
thousand pistoles upon the front of the _tyhaia_, or head-dress, where
it made a most glorious show indeed. I had my own diamond necklace on,
and my hair was _tout brilliant_, all glittering with jewels.

His picture set with diamonds I had placed stitched to my vest, just, as
might be supposed, upon my heart (which is the compliment in such cases
among the Eastern people); and all being open at the breast, there was
no room for anything of a jewel there.

In this figure, Amy holding the train of my robe, I came down to him. He
was surprised, and perfectly astonished. He knew me, to be sure, because
I had prepared him, and because there was nobody else there but the
Quaker and Amy; but he by no means knew Amy, for she had dressed herself
in the habit of a Turkish slave, being the garb of my little Turk which
I had at Naples, as I have said; she had her neck and arms bare, was
bareheaded, and her hair braided in a long tassel hanging down her back;
but the jade could neither hold her countenance or her chattering
tongue, so as to be concealed long.

Well, he was so charmed with this dress that he would have me sit and
dine in it; but it was so thin, and so open before, and the weather
being also sharp, that I was afraid of taking cold; however, the fire
being enlarged and the doors kept shut, I sat to oblige him, and he
professed he never saw so fine a dress in his life. I afterwards told
him that my husband (so he called the jeweller that was killed) bought
it for me at Leghorn, with a young Turkish slave which I parted with at
Paris; and that it was by the help of that slave that I learned how to
dress in it, and how everything was to be worn, and many of the Turkish
customs also, with some of their language. This story agreeing with the
fact, only changing the person, was very natural, and so it went off
with him; but there was good reason why I should not receive any company
in this dress--that is to say, not in England. I need not repeat it; you
will hear more of it.

But when I came abroad I frequently put it on, and upon two or three
occasions danced in it, but always at his request.

We continued at the Quaker's lodgings for above a year; for now, making
as though it was difficult to determine where to settle in England to
his satisfaction, unless in London, which was not to mine, I pretended
to make him an offer, that, to oblige him, I began to incline to go and
live abroad with him; that I knew nothing could be more agreeable to
him, and that as to me, every place was alike; that, as I had lived
abroad without a husband so many years, it could be no burthen to me to
live abroad again, especially with him. Then we fell to straining our
courtesies upon one another. He told me he was perfectly easy at living
in England, and had squared all his affairs accordingly; for that, as he
had told me he intended to give over all business in the world, as well
the care of managing it as the concern about it, seeing we were both in
condition neither to want it or to have it be worth our while, so I
might see it was his intention, by his getting himself naturalised, and
getting the patent of baronet, &c. Well, for all that, I told him I
accepted his compliment, but I could not but know that his native
country, where his children were breeding up, must be most agreeable to
him, and that, if I was of such value to him, I would be there then, to
enhance the rate of his satisfaction; that wherever he was would be a
home to me, and any place in the world would be England to me if he was
with me; and thus, in short, I brought him to give me leave to oblige
him with going to live abroad, when, in truth, I could not have been
perfectly easy at living in England, unless I had kept constantly within
doors, lest some time or other the dissolute life I had lived here
should have come to be known, and all those wicked things have been
known too, which I now began to be very much ashamed of.

When we closed up our wedding week, in which our Quaker had been so very
handsome to us, I told him how much I thought we were obliged to her for
her generous carriage to us; how she had acted the kindest part through
the whole, and how faithful a friend she had been to me upon all
occasions; and then letting him know a little of her family unhappiness,
I proposed that I thought I not only ought to be grateful to her, but
really to do something extraordinary for her, towards making her easy in
her affairs. And I added, that I had no hangers-on that should trouble
him; that there was nobody belonged to me but what was thoroughly
provided for, and that, if I did something for this honest woman that
was considerable, it should be the last gift I would give to anybody in
the world but Amy; and as for her, we were not agoing to turn her
adrift, but whenever anything offered for her, we would do as we saw
cause; that, in the meantime, Amy was not poor, that she had saved
together between seven and eight hundred pounds. By the way, I did not
tell him how, and by what wicked ways she got it, but that she had it;
and that was enough to let him know she would never be in want of us.

My spouse was exceedingly pleased with my discourse about the Quaker,
made a kind of a speech to me upon the subject of gratitude, told me it
was one of the brightest parts of a gentlewoman, that it was so twisted
with honesty, nay, and even with religion too, that he questioned
whether either of them could be found where gratitude was not to be
found; that in this act there was not only gratitude, but charity; and
that to make the charity still more Christian-like, the object too had
real merit to attract it; he therefore agreed to the thing with all his
heart, only would have had me let him pay it out of his effects.

I told him, as for that, I did not design, whatever I had said formerly,
that we should have two pockets; and that though I had talked to him of
being a free woman, and an independent, and the like, and he had offered
and promised that I should keep all my own estate in my own hands; yet,
that since I had taken him, I would e'en do as other honest wives
did--where I thought fit to give myself, I should give what I had too;
that if I reserved anything, it should be only in case of mortality, and
that I might give it to his children afterwards, as my own gift; and
that, in short, if he thought fit to join stocks, we would see to-morrow
morning what strength we could both make up in the world, and bringing
it all together, consider, before we resolved upon the place of
removing, how we should dispose of what we had, as well as of ourselves.
This discourse was too obliging, and he too much of a man of sense not
to receive it as it was meant. He only answered, we would do in that as
we should both agree; but the thing under our present care was to show
not gratitude only, but charity and affection too, to our kind friend
the Quaker; and the first word he spoke of was to settle a thousand
pounds upon her for her life--that is to say, sixty pounds a year--but
in such a manner as not to be in the power of any person to reach but
herself. This was a great thing, and indeed showed the generous
principles of my husband, and for that reason I mention it; but I
thought that a little too much too, and particularly because I had
another thing in view for her about the plate; so I told him I thought,
if he gave her a purse with a hundred guineas as a present first, and
then made her a compliment of £40 per annum for her life, secured any
such way as she should desire, it would be very handsome.

He agreed to that; and the same day, in the evening, when we were just
going to bed, he took my Quaker by the hand, and, with a kiss, told her
that we had been very kindly treated by her from the beginning of this
affair, and his wife before, as she (meaning me) had informed him; and
that he thought himself bound to let her see that she had obliged
friends who knew how to be grateful; that for his part of the obligation
he desired she would accept of that, for an acknowledgment in part only
(putting the gold into her hand), and that his wife would talk with her
about what farther he had to say to her; and upon that, not giving her
time hardly to say "Thank ye," away he went upstairs into our
bedchamber, leaving her confused and not knowing what to say.

When he was gone she began to make very handsome and obliging
representations of her goodwill to us both, but that it was without
expectation of reward; that I had given her several valuable presents
before--and so, indeed, I had; for, besides the piece of linen which I
had given her at first, I had given her a suit of damask table-linen, of
the linen I bought for my balls, viz., three table-cloths and three
dozen of napkins; and at another time I gave her a little necklace of
gold beads, and the like; but that is by the way. But she mentioned
them, I say, and how she was obliged by me on many other occasions; that
she was not in condition to show her gratitude any other way, not being
able to make a suitable return; and that now we took from her all
opportunity, to balance my former friendship, and left her more in debt
than she was before. She spoke this in a very good kind of manner, in
her own way, but which was very agreeable indeed, and had as much
apparent sincerity, and I verily believe as real as was possible to be
expressed; but I put a stop to it, and bade her say no more, but accept
of what my spouse had given her, which was but in part, as she had heard
him say. "And put it up," says I, "and come and sit down here, and give
me leave to say something else to you on the same head, which my spouse
and I have settled between ourselves in your behalf." "What dost thee
mean?" says she, and blushed, and looked surprised, but did not stir.
She was going to speak again, but I interrupted her, and told her she
should make no more apologies of any kind whatever, for I had better
things than all this to talk to her of; so I went on, and told her, that
as she had been so friendly and kind to us on every occasion, and that
her house was the lucky place where we came together, and that she knew
I was from her own mouth acquainted in part with her circumstances, we
were resolved she should be the better for us as long as she lived. Then
I told what we had resolved to do for her, and that she had nothing more
to do but to consult with me how it should be effectually secured for
her, distinct from any of the effects which were her husband's; and that
if her husband did so supply her that she could live comfortably, and
not want it for bread or other necessaries, she should not make use of
it, but lay up the income of it, and add it every year to the principal,
so to increase the annual payment, which in time, and perhaps before she
might come to want it, might double itself; that we were very willing
whatever she should so lay up should be to herself, and whoever she
thought fit after her; but that the forty pounds a year must return to
our family after her life, which we both wished might be long and happy.

Let no reader wonder at my extraordinary concern for this poor woman, or
at my giving my bounty to her a place in this account. It is not, I
assure you, to make a pageantry of my charity, or to value myself upon
the greatness of my soul, that should give in so profuse a manner as
this, which was above my figure, if my wealth had been twice as much as
it was; but there was another spring from whence all flowed, and 'tis on
that account I speak of it. Was it possible I could think of a poor
desolate woman with four children, and her husband gone from her, and
perhaps good for little if he had stayed--I say, was I, that had tasted
so deep of the sorrows of such a kind of widowhood, able to look on her,
and think of her circumstances, and not be touched in an uncommon
manner? No, no; I never looked on her and her family, though she was not
left so helpless and friendless as I had been, without remembering my
own condition, when Amy was sent out to pawn or sell my pair of stays to
buy a breast of mutton and a bunch of turnips; nor could I look on her
poor children, though not poor and perishing, like mine, without tears;
reflecting on the dreadful condition that mine were reduced to, when
poor Amy sent them all into their aunt's in Spitalfields, and run away
from them. These were the original springs, or fountain-head, from
whence my affectionate thoughts were moved to assist this poor woman.

When a poor debtor, having lain long in the Compter, or Ludgate, or the
King's Bench for debt, afterwards gets out, rises again in the world,
and grows rich, such a one is a certain benefactor to the prisoners
there, and perhaps to every prison he passes by as long as he lives, for
he remembers the dark days of his own sorrow; and even those who never
had the experience of such sorrows to stir up their minds to acts of
charity would have the same charitable, good disposition did they as
sensibly remember what it is that distinguishes them from others by a
more favourable and merciful Providence.

This, I say, was, however, the spring of my concern for this honest,
friendly, and grateful Quaker; and as I had so plentiful a fortune in
the world, I resolved she should taste the fruit of her kind usage to me
in a manner that she could not expect.

All the while I talked to her I saw the disorder of her mind; the sudden
joy was too much for her, and she coloured, trembled, changed, and at
last grew pale, and was indeed near fainting, when she hastily rung a
little bell for her maid, who coming in immediately, she beckoned to
her--for speak she could not--to fill her a glass of wine; but she had
no breath to take it in, and was almost choked with that which she took
in her mouth. I saw she was ill, and assisted her what I could, and with
spirits and things to smell to just kept her from fainting, when she
beckoned to her maid to withdraw, and immediately burst out in crying,
and that relieved her. When she recovered herself a little she flew to
me, and throwing her arms about my neck, "Oh!" says she, "thou hast
almost killed me;" and there she hung, laying her head in my neck for
half a quarter of an hour, not able to speak, but sobbing like a child
that had been whipped.

I was very sorry that I did not stop a little in the middle of my
discourse and make her drink a glass of wine before it had put her
spirits into such a violent motion; but it was too late, and it was ten
to one odds but that it had killed her.

But she came to herself at last, and began to say some very good things
in return for my kindness. I would not let her go on, but told her I had
more to say to her still than all this, but that I would let it alone
till another time. My meaning was about the box of plate, good part of
which I gave her, and some I gave to Amy; for I had so much plate, and
some so large, that I thought if I let my husband see it he might be apt
to wonder what occasion I could ever have for so much, and for plate of
such a kind too; as particularly a great cistern for bottles, which cost
a hundred and twenty pounds, and some large candlesticks too big for any
ordinary use. These I caused Amy to sell; in short, Amy sold above three
hundred pounds' worth of plate; what I gave the Quaker was worth above
sixty pounds, and I gave Amy above thirty pounds' worth, and yet I had a
great deal left for my husband.

Nor did our kindness to the Quaker end with the forty pounds a year, for
we were always, while we stayed with her, which was above ten months,
giving her one good thing or another; and, in a word, instead of lodging
with her, she boarded with us, for I kept the house, and she and all
her family ate and drank with us, and yet we paid her the rent of the
house too; in short, I remembered my widowhood, and I made this widow's
heart glad many a day the more upon that account.

And now my spouse and I began to think of going over to Holland, where I
had proposed to him to live, and in order to settle all the
preliminaries of our future manner of living, I began to draw in my
effects, so as to have them all at command upon whatever occasion we
thought fit; after which, one morning I called my spouse up to me: "Hark
ye, sir," said I to him, "I have two very weighty questions to ask of
you. I don't know what answer you will give to the first, but I doubt
you will be able to give but a sorry answer to the other, and yet, I
assure you, it is of the last importance to yourself, and towards the
future part of your life, wherever it is to be."

He did not seem to be much alarmed, because he could see I was speaking
in a kind of merry way. "Let's hear your questions, my dear," says he,
"and I'll give the best answer I can to them." "Why, first," says I:

"I. You have married a wife here, made her a lady, and put her in
expectation of being something else still when she comes abroad. Pray
have you examined whether you are able to supply all her extravagant
demands when she comes abroad, and maintain an expensive Englishwoman in
all her pride and vanity? In short, have you inquired whether you are
able to keep her?

"II. You have married a wife here, and given her a great many fine
things, and you maintain her like a princess, and sometimes call her so.
Pray what portion have you had with her? what fortune has she been to
you? and where does her estate lie, that you keep her so fine? I am
afraid that you keep her in a figure a great deal above her estate, at
least above all that you have seen of it yet. Are you sure you han't got
a bite, and that you have not made a beggar a lady?"

"Well," says he, "have you any more questions to ask? Let's have them
all together; perhaps they may be all answered in a few words, as well
as these two." "No," says I, "these are the two grand questions--at
least for the present." "Why, then," says he, "I'll answer you in a few
words; that I am fully master of my own circumstances, and, without
farther inquiry, can let my wife you speak of know, that as I have made
her a lady I can maintain her as a lady, wherever she goes with me; and
this whether I have one pistole of her portion, or whether she has any
portion or no; and as I have not inquired whether she has any portion or
not, so she shall not have the less respect showed her from me, or be
obliged to live meaner, or be anyways straitened on that account; on the
contrary, if she goes abroad to live with me in my own country, I will
make her more than a lady, and support the expense of it too, without
meddling with anything she has; and this, I suppose," says he, "contains
an answer to both your questions together."

He spoke this with a great deal more earnestness in his countenance than
I had when I proposed my questions, and said a great many kind things
upon it, as the consequence of former discourses, so that I was obliged
to be in earnest too. "My dear," says I, "I was but in jest in my
questions; but they were proposed to introduce what I am going to say to
you in earnest; namely, that if I am to go abroad, 'tis time I should
let you know how things stand, and what I have to bring you with your
wife; how it is to be disposed and secured, and the like; and therefore
come," says I, "sit down, and let me show you your bargain here; I hope
you will find that you have not got a wife without a fortune."

He told me then, that since he found I was in earnest, he desired that I
would adjourn it till to-morrow, and then we would do as the poor people
do after they marry, feel in their pockets, and see how much money they
can bring together in the world. "Well," says I, "with all my heart;"
and so we ended our talk for that time.

As this was in the morning, my spouse went out after dinner to his
goldsmith's, as he said, and about three hours after returns with a
porter and two large boxes with him; and his servant brought another
box, which I observed was almost as heavy as the two that the porter
brought, and made the poor fellow sweat heartily; he dismissed the
porter, and in a little while after went out again with his man, and
returning at night, brought another porter with more boxes and bundles,
and all was carried up, and put into a chamber, next to our bedchamber;
and in the morning he called for a pretty large round table, and began
to unpack.

When the boxes were opened, I found they were chiefly full of books, and
papers, and parchments, I mean books of accounts, and writings, and such
things as were in themselves of no moment to me, because I understood
them not; but I perceived he took them all out, and spread them about
him upon the table and chairs, and began to be very busy with them; so I
withdrew and left him; and he was indeed so busy among them, that he
never missed me till I had been gone a good while; but when he had gone
through all his papers, and come to open a little box, he called for me
again. "Now," says he, and called me his countess, "I am ready to answer
your first question; if you will sit down till I have opened this box,
we will see how it stands."

So we opened the box; there was in it indeed what I did not expect, for
I thought he had sunk his estate rather than raised it; but he produced
me in goldsmiths' bills, and stock in the English East India Company,
about sixteen thousand pounds sterling; then he gave into my hands nine
assignments upon the Bank of Lyons in France, and two upon the rents of
the town-house in Paris, amounting in the whole to 5800 crowns per
annum, or annual rent, as it is called there; and lastly, the sum of
30,000 rixdollars in the Bank of Amsterdam; besides some jewels and gold
in the box to the value of about £1500 or £1600, among which was a very
good necklace of pearl of about £200 value; and that he pulled out and
tied about my neck, telling me that should not be reckoned into the
account.

I was equally pleased and surprised, and it was with an inexpressible
joy that I saw him so rich.

"You might well tell me," said I, "that you were able to make me
countess, and maintain me as such." In short, he was immensely rich; for
besides all this, he showed me, which was the reason of his being so
busy among the books, I say, he showed me several adventures he had
abroad in the business of his merchandise; as particularly an eighth
share in an East India ship then abroad; an account-courant with a
merchant at Cadiz in Spain; about £3000 lent upon bottomry, upon ships
gone to the Indies; and a large cargo of goods in a merchant's hands,
for sale at Lisbon in Portugal; so that in his books there was about
£12,000 more; all which put together, made about £27,000 sterling, and
£1320 a year.

I stood amazed at this account, as well I might, and said nothing to him
for a good while, and the rather because I saw him still busy looking
over his books. After a while, as I was going to express my wonder,
"Hold, my dear," says he, "this is not all neither;" then he pulled me
out some old seals, and small parchment rolls, which I did not
understand; but he told me they were a right of reversion which he had
to a paternal estate in his family, and a mortgage of 14,000 rixdollars,
which he had upon it, in the hands of the present possessor; so that was
about £3000 more.

"But now hold again," says he, "for I must pay my debts out of all this,
and they are very great, I assure you;" and the first he said was a
black article of 8000 pistoles, which he had a lawsuit about at Paris,
but had it awarded against him, which was the loss he had told me of,
and which made him leave Paris in disgust; that in other accounts he
owed about £5300 sterling; but after all this, upon the whole, he had
still £17,000 clear stock in money, and £1320 a year in rent.

After some pause, it came to my turn to speak. "Well," says I, "'tis
very hard a gentleman with such a fortune as this should come over to
England, and marry a wife with nothing; it shall never," says I, "be
said, but what I have, I'll bring into the public stock;" so I began to
produce.

First, I pulled out the mortgage which good Sir Robert had procured for
me, the annual rent £700 per annum; the principal money £14,000.

Secondly, I pulled out another mortgage upon land, procured by the same
faithful friend, which at three times had advanced £12,000.

Thirdly, I pulled him out a parcel of little securities, procured by
several hands, by fee-farm rents, and such petty mortgages as those
times afforded, amounting to £10,800 principal money, and paying six
hundred and thirty-six pounds a-year. So that in the whole there was two
thousand and fifty-six pounds a year ready money constantly coming in.

When I had shown him all these, I laid them upon the table, and bade him
take them, that he might be able to give me an answer to the second
question. What fortune he had with his wife? And laughed a little at it.

He looked at them awhile, and then handed them all back again to me: "I
will not touch them," says he, "nor one of them, till they are all
settled in trustees' hands for your own use, and the management wholly
your own."

I cannot omit what happened to me while all this was acting; though it
was cheerful work in the main, yet I trembled every joint of me, worse
for aught I know than ever Belshazzar did at the handwriting on the
wall, and the occasion was every way as just. "Unhappy wretch," said I
to myself, "shall my ill-got wealth, the product of prosperous lust, and
of a vile and vicious life of whoredom and adultery, be intermingled
with the honest well-gotten estate of this innocent gentleman, to be a
moth and a caterpillar among it, and bring the judgments of heaven upon
him, and upon what he has, for my sake? Shall my wickedness blast his
comforts? Shall I be fire in his flax? and be a means to provoke heaven
to curse his blessings? God forbid! I'll keep them asunder if it be
possible."

This is the true reason why I have been so particular in the account of
my vast acquired stock; and how his estate, which was perhaps the
product of many years' fortunate industry, and which was equal if not
superior to mine at best, was, at my request, kept apart from mine, as
is mentioned above.

I have told you how he gave back all my writings into my own hands
again. "Well," says I, "seeing you will have it be kept apart, it shall
be so, upon one condition, which I have to propose, and no other." "And
what is the condition?" says he. "Why," says I, "all the pretence I can
have for the making over my own estate to me is, that in case of your
mortality, I may have it reserved for me, if I outlive you." "Well,"
says he, "that is true" "But then," said I, "the annual income is always
received by the husband, during his life, as 'tis supposed, for the
mutual subsistence of the family; now," says I, "here is £2000 a year,
which I believe is as much as we shall spend, and I desire none of it
may be saved; and all the income of your own estate, the interest of the
£17,000 and the £1320 a year, may be constantly laid by for the increase
of your estate; and so," added I, "by joining the interest every year to
the capital you will perhaps grow as rich as you would do if you were to
trade with it all, if you were obliged to keep house out of it too."

He liked the proposal very well, and said it should be so; and this way
I, in some measure, satisfied myself that I should not bring my husband
under the blast of a just Providence, for mingling my cursed ill-gotten
wealth with his honest estate. This was occasioned by the reflections
which, at some certain intervals of time, came into my thoughts of the
justice of heaven, which I had reason to expect would some time or other
still fall upon me or my effects, for the dreadful life I had lived.

And let nobody conclude from the strange success I met with in all my
wicked doings, and the vast estate which I had raised by it, that
therefore I either was happy or easy. No, no, there was a dart struck
into the liver; there was a secret hell within, even all the while, when
our joy was at the highest; but more especially now, after it was all
over, and when, according to all appearance, I was one of the happiest
women upon earth; all this while, I say, I had such constant terror upon
my mind, as gave me every now and then very terrible shocks, and which
made me expect something very frightful upon every accident of life.

In a word, it never lightened or thundered, but I expected the next
flash would penetrate my vitals, and melt the sword (soul) in this
scabbard of flesh; it never blew a storm of wind, but I expected the
fall of some stack of chimneys, or some part of the house, would bury me
in its ruins; and so of other things.

But I shall perhaps have occasion to speak of all these things again
by-and-by; the case before us was in a manner settled; we had full four
thousand pounds per annum for our future subsistence, besides a vast sum
in jewels and plate; and besides this, I had about eight thousand pounds
reserved in money which I kept back from him, to provide for my two
daughters, of whom I have much yet to say.

With this estate, settled as you have heard, and with the best husband
in the world, I left England again; I had not only, in human prudence,
and by the nature of the thing, being now married and settled in so
glorious a manner,--I say, I had not only abandoned all the gay and
wicked course which I had gone through before, but I began to look back
upon it with that horror and that detestation which is the certain
companion, if not the forerunner, of repentance.

Sometimes the wonders of my present circumstances would work upon me,
and I should have some raptures upon my soul, upon the subject of my
coming so smoothly out of the arms of hell, that I was not ingulfed in
ruin, as most who lead such lives are, first or last; but this was a
flight too high for me; I was not come to that repentance that is raised
from a sense of Heaven's goodness; I repented of the crime, but it was
of another and lower kind of repentance, and rather moved by my fears of
vengeance, than from a sense of being spared from being punished, and
landed safe after a storm.

The first thing which happened after our coming to the Hague (where we
lodged for a while) was, that my spouse saluted me one morning with the
title of countess, as he said he intended to do, by having the
inheritance to which the honour was annexed made over to him. It is
true, it was a reversion, but it soon fell, and in the meantime, as all
the brothers of a count are called counts, so I had the title by
courtesy, about three years before I had it in reality.

I was agreeably surprised at this coming so soon, and would have had my
spouse have taken the money which it cost him out of my stock, but he
laughed at me, and went on.

I was now in the height of my glory and prosperity, and I was called the
Countess de ----; for I had obtained that unlooked for, which I secretly
aimed at, and was really the main reason of my coming abroad. I took now
more servants, lived in a kind of magnificence that I had not been
acquainted with, was called "your honour" at every word, and had a
coronet behind my coach; though at the same time I knew little or
nothing of my new pedigree.

The first thing that my spouse took upon him to manage, was to declare
ourselves married eleven years before our arriving in Holland; and
consequently to acknowledge our little son, who was yet in England, to
be legitimate; order him to be brought over, and added to his family,
and acknowledge him to be our own.

This was done by giving notice to his people at Nimeguen, where his
children (which were two sons and a daughter) were brought up, that he
was come over from England, and that he was arrived at the Hague with
his wife, and should reside there some time, and that he would have his
two sons brought down to see him; which accordingly was done, and where
I entertained them with all the kindness and tenderness that they could
expect from their mother-in-law; and who pretended to be so ever since
they were two or three years old.

This supposing us to have been so long married was not difficult at all,
in a country where we had been seen together about that time, viz.,
eleven years and a half before, and where we had never been seen
afterwards till we now returned together: this being seen together was
also openly owned and acknowledged, of course, by our friend the
merchant at Rotterdam, and also by the people in the house where we both
lodged in the same city, and where our first intimacies began, and who,
as it happened, were all alive; and therefore, to make it the more
public, we made a tour to Rotterdam again, lodged in the same house, and
was visited there by our friend the merchant, and afterwards invited
frequently to his house, where he treated us very handsomely.

This conduct of my spouse, and which he managed very cleverly, was
indeed a testimony of a wonderful degree of honesty and affection to our
little son; for it was done purely for the sake of the child.

I call it an honest affection, because it was from a principle of
honesty that he so earnestly concerned himself to prevent the scandal
which would otherwise have fallen upon the child, who was itself
innocent; and as it was from this principle of justice that he so
earnestly solicited me, and conjured me by the natural affections of a
mother, to marry him when it was yet young within me and unborn, that
the child might not suffer for the sin of its father and mother; so,
though at the same time he really loved me very well, yet I had reason
to believe that it was from this principle of justice to the child that
he came to England again to seek me with design to marry me, and, as he
called it, save the innocent lamb from infamy worse than death.

It was with a just reproach to myself that I must repeat it again, that
I had not the same concern for it, though it was the child of my own
body; nor had I ever the hearty affectionate love to the child that he
had. What the reason of it was I cannot tell; and, indeed, I had shown a
general neglect of the child through all the gay years of my London
revels, except that I sent Amy to look upon it now and then, and to pay
for its nursing; as for me, I scarce saw it four times in the first four
years of its life, and often wished it would go quietly out of the
world; whereas a son which I had by the jeweller, I took a different
care of, and showed a different concern for, though I did not let him
know me; for I provided very well for him, had him put out very well to
school, and when he came to years fit for it, let him go over with a
person of honesty and good business, to the Indies; and after he had
lived there some time, and began to act for himself, sent him over the
value of £2000, at several times, with which he traded and grew rich;
and, as 'tis to be hoped, may at last come over again with forty or
fifty thousand pounds in his pocket, as many do who have not such
encouragement at their beginning.

I also sent him over a wife, a beautiful young lady, well-bred, an
exceeding good-natured pleasant creature; but the nice young fellow did
not like her, and had the impudence to write to me, that is, to the
person I employed to correspond with him, to send him another, and
promised that he would marry her I had sent him, to a friend of his, who
liked her better than he did; but I took it so ill, that I would not
send him another, and withal, stopped another article of £1000 which I
had appointed to send him. He considered of it afterwards, and offered
to take her; but then truly she took so ill the first affront he put
upon her, that she would not have him, and I sent him word I thought she
was very much in the right. However, after courting her two years, and
some friends interposing, she took him, and made him an excellent wife,
as I knew she would, but I never sent him the thousand pounds cargo, so
that he lost that money for misusing me, and took the lady at last
without it.

My new spouse and I lived a very regular, contemplative life; and, in
itself, certainly a life filled with all human felicity. But if I looked
upon my present situation with satisfaction, as I certainly did, so, in
proportion, I on all occasions looked back on former things with
detestation, and with the utmost affliction; and now, indeed, and not
till now, those reflections began to prey upon my comforts, and lessen
the sweets of my other enjoyments. They might be said to have gnawed a
hole in my heart before; but now they made a hole quite through it: now
they ate into all my pleasant things, made bitter every sweet, and mixed
my sighs with every smile.

Not all the affluence of a plentiful fortune; not a hundred thousand
pounds estate (for, between us, we had little less); not honour and
titles, attendants and equipages; in a word, not all the things we call
pleasure, could give me any relish, or sweeten the taste of things to
me; at least, not so much but I grew sad, heavy, pensive, and
melancholy; slept little, and ate little; dreamed continually of the
most frightful and terrible things imaginable: nothing but apparitions
of devils and monsters, falling into gulfs, and off from steep and high
precipices, and the like; so that in the morning, when I should rise,
and be refreshed with the blessing of rest, I was hag-ridden with
frights and terrible things formed merely in the imagination, and was
either tired and wanted sleep, or overrun with vapours, and not fit for
conversing with my family, or any one else.

My husband, the tenderest creature in the world, and particularly so to
me, was in great concern for me, and did everything that lay in his
power to comfort and restore me; strove to reason me out of it; then
tried all the ways possible to divert me: but it was all to no purpose,
or to but very little.

My only relief was sometimes to unbosom myself to poor Amy, when she and
I was alone; and she did all she could to comfort me. But all was to
little effect there; for, though Amy was the better penitent before,
when we had been in the storm, Amy was just where she used to be now, a
wild, gay, loose wretch, and not much the graver for her age; for Amy
was between forty and fifty by this time too.

But to go on with my own story. As I had no comforter, so I had no
counsellor; it was well, as I often thought, that I was not a Roman
Catholic; for what a piece of work should I have made, to have gone to a
priest with such a history as I had to tell him; and what penance would
any father confessor have obliged me to perform, especially if he had
been honest, and true to his office!

However, as I had none of the recourse, so I had none of the absolution,
by which the criminal confessing goes away comforted; but I went about
with a heart loaded with crime, and altogether in the dark as to what I
was to do; and in this condition I languished near two years. I may well
call it languishing, for if Providence had not relieved me, I should
have died in little time. But of that hereafter.

I must now go back to another scene, and join it to this end of my
story, which will complete all my concern with England, at least all
that I shall bring into this account.

I have hinted at large what I had done for my two sons, one at Messina,
and the other in the Indies; but I have not gone through the story of my
two daughters. I was so in danger of being known by one of them, that I
durst not see her, so as to let her know who I was; and for the other, I
could not well know how to see her, and own her, and let her see me,
because she must then know that I would not let her sister know me,
which would look strange; so that, upon the whole, I resolved to see
neither of them at all. But Amy managed all that for me; and when she
had made gentlewomen of them both, by giving them a good, though late
education, she had like to have blown up the whole case, and herself and
me too, by an unhappy discovery of herself to the last of them, that is,
to her who was our cook-maid, and who, as I said before, Amy had been
obliged to turn away, for fear of the very discovery which now happened.
I have observed already in what manner Amy managed her by a third
person; and how the girl, when she was set up for a lady, as above, came
and visited Amy at my lodgings; after which, Amy going, as was her
custom, to see the girl's brother (my son) at the honest man's house in
Spitalfields, both the girls were there, merely by accident, at the same
time; and the other girl unawares discovered the secret, namely, that
this was the lady that had done all this for them.

Amy was greatly surprised at it; but as she saw there was no remedy, she
made a jest of it, and so after that conversed openly, being still
satisfied that neither of them could make much of it, as long as they
knew nothing of me. So she took them together one time, and told them
the history, as she called it, of their mother, beginning at the
miserable carrying them to their aunt's; she owned she was not their
mother herself, but described her to them. However, when she said she
was not their mother, one of them expressed herself very much surprised,
for the girl had taken up a strong fancy that Amy was really her mother,
and that she had, for some particular reasons, concealed it from her;
and therefore, when she told her frankly that she was not her mother,
the girl fell a-crying, and Amy had much ado to keep life in her. This
was the girl who was at first my cook-maid in the Pall Mall. When Amy
had brought her to again a little, and she had recovered her first
disorder, Amy asked what ailed her? The poor girl hung about her, and
kissed her, and was in such a passion still, though she was a great
wench of nineteen or twenty years old, that she could not be brought to
speak a great while. At last, having recovered her speech, she said
still, "But oh! Do not say you a'n't my mother! I'm sure you are my
mother;" and then the girl cried again like to kill herself. Amy could
not tell what to do with her a good while; she was loth to say again she
was not her mother, because she would not throw her into a fit of
crying again; but she went round about a little with her. "Why, child,"
says she, "why would you have me be your mother? If it be because I am
so kind to you, be easy, my dear," says Amy; "I'll be as kind to you
still, as if I was your mother."

"Ay, but," says the girl, "I am sure you are my mother too; and what
have I done that you won't own me, and that you will not be called my
mother? Though I am poor, you have made me a gentlewoman," says she,
"and I won't do anything to disgrace you; besides," added she, "I can
keep a secret, too, especially for my own mother, sure;" then she calls
Amy her dear mother, and hung about her neck again, crying still
vehemently.

This last part of the girl's words alarmed Amy, and, as she told me,
frighted her terribly; nay, she was so confounded with it, that she was
not able to govern herself, or to conceal her disorder from the girl
herself, as you shall hear. Amy was at a full stop, and confused to the
last degree; and the girl, a sharp jade, turned it upon her. "My dear
mother," says she, "do not be uneasy about it; I know it all; but do not
be uneasy, I won't let my sister know a word of it, or my brother
either, without you giving me leave; but don't disown me now you have
found me; don't hide yourself from me any longer; I can't bear that,"
says she, "it will break my heart."

"I think the girl's mad," says Amy; "why, child, I tell thee, if I was
thy mother I would not disown thee; don't you see I am as kind to you
as if I was your mother?" Amy might as well have sung a song to a
kettledrum, as talk to her. "Yes," says the girl, "you are very good to
me indeed;" and that was enough to make anybody believe she was her
mother too; but, however, that was not the case, she had other reasons
to believe, and to know, that she was her mother; and it was a sad thing
she would not let her call her mother, who was her own child.

Amy was so heart-full with the disturbance of it, that she did not enter
farther with her into the inquiry, as she would otherwise have done; I
mean, as to what made the girl so positive; but comes away, and tells me
the whole story.

I was thunderstruck with the story at first, and much more afterwards,
as you shall hear; but, I say, I was thunderstruck at first, and amazed,
and said to Amy, "There must be something or other in it more than we
know of." But, having examined farther into it, I found the girl had no
notion of anybody but of Amy; and glad I was that I was not concerned in
the pretence, and that the girl had no notion of me in it. But even this
easiness did not continue long; for the next time Amy went to see her,
she was the same thing, and rather more violent with Amy than she was
before. Amy endeavoured to pacify her by all the ways imaginable: first,
she told her she took it ill that she would not believe her; and told
her, if she would not give over such a foolish whimsey, she would leave
her to the wide world as she found her.

This put the girl into fits, and she cried ready to kill herself, and
hung about Amy again like a child. "Why," says Amy, "why can you not be
easy with me, then, and compose yourself, and let me go on to do you
good, and show you kindness, as I would do, and as I intend to do? Can
you think that if I was your mother, I would not tell you so? What
whimsey is this that possesses your mind?" says Amy. Well, the girl told
her in a few words (but those few such as frighted Amy out of her wits,
and me too) that she knew well enough how it was. "I know," says she,
"when you left ----," naming the village, "where I lived when my father
went away from us all, that you went over to France; I know that too,
and who you went with," says the girl; "did not my Lady Roxana come back
again with you? I know it all well enough; though I was but a child, I
have heard it all." And thus she run on with such discourse as put Amy
out of all temper again; and she raved at her like a bedlam, and told
her she would never come near her any more; she might go a-begging again
if she would; she'd have nothing to do with her. The girl, a passionate
wench, told her she knew the worst of it, she could go to service again,
and if she would not own her own child, she must do as she pleased; then
she fell into a passion of crying again, as if she would kill herself.

In short, this girl's conduct terrified Amy to the last degree, and me
too; and was it not that we knew the girl was quite wrong in some
things, she was yet so right in some other, that it gave me a great deal
of perplexity; but that which put Amy the most to it, was that the girl
(my daughter) told her that she (meaning me, her mother) had gone away
with the jeweller, and into France too; she did not call him the
jeweller, but with the landlord of the house; who, after her mother fell
into distress, and that Amy had taken all the children from her, made
much of her, and afterwards married her.

In short, it was plain the girl had but a broken account of things, but
yet that she had received some accounts that had a reality in the bottom
of them, so that, it seems, our first measures, and the amour with the
jeweller, were not so concealed as I thought they had been; and, it
seems, came in a broken manner to my sister-in-law, who Amy carried the
children to, and she made some bustle, it seems, about it. But, as good
luck was, it was too late, and I was removed and gone, none knew
whither, or else she would have sent all the children home to me again,
to be sure.

This we picked out of the girl's discourse, that is to say, Amy did, at
several times; but it all consisted of broken fragments of stories, such
as the girl herself had heard so long ago, that she herself could make
very little of it; only that in the main, that her mother had played the
whore; had gone away with the gentleman that was landlord of the house;
that he married her; that she went into France. And, as she had learned
in my family, where she was a servant, that Mrs. Amy and her Lady Roxana
had been in France together, so she put all these things together, and
joining them with the great kindness that Amy now showed her, possessed
the creature that Amy was really her mother, nor was it possible for Amy
to conquer it for a long time.

But this, after I had searched into it, as far as by Amy's relation I
could get an account of it, did not disquiet me half so much as that the
young slut had got the name of Roxana by the end, and that she knew who
her Lady Roxana was, and the like; though this, neither, did not hang
together, for then she would not have fixed upon Amy for her mother. But
some time after, when Amy had almost persuaded her out of it, and that
the girl began to be so confounded in her discourses of it, that she
made neither head nor tail, at last the passionate creature flew out in
a kind of rage, and said to Amy, that if she was not her mother, Madam
Roxana was her mother then, for one of them, she was sure, was her
mother; and then all this that Amy had done for her was by Madam
Roxana's order. "And I am sure," says she, "it was my Lady Roxana's
coach that brought the gentlewoman, whoever it was, to my uncle's in
Spitalfields, for the coachman told me so." Amy fell a-laughing at her
aloud, as was her usual way; but, as Amy told me, it was but on one
side of her mouth, for she was so confounded at her discourse, that she
was ready to sink into the ground; and so was I too when she told it me.

However, Amy brazened her out of it all; told her, "Well, since you
think you are so high-born as to be my Lady Roxana's daughter, you may
go to her and claim your kindred, can't you? I suppose," says Amy, "you
know where to find her?" She said she did not question to find her, for
she knew where she was gone to live privately; but, though, she might be
removed again. "For I know how it is," says she, with a kind of a smile
or a grin; "I know how it all is, well enough."

Amy was so provoked, that she told me, in short, she began to think it
would be absolutely necessary to murder her. That expression filled me
with horror, all my blood ran chill in my veins, and a fit of trembling
seized me, that I could not speak a good while; at last. "What, is the
devil in you, Amy?" said I. "Nay, nay," says she, "let it be the devil
or not the devil, if I thought she knew one tittle of your history, I
would despatch her if she were my own daughter a thousand times." "And
I," says I in a rage, "as well as I love you, would be the first that
should put the halter about your neck, and see you hanged with more
satisfaction than ever I saw you in my life; nay," says I, "you would
not live to be hanged, I believe I should cut your throat with my own
hand; I am almost ready to do it," said I, "as 'tis, for your but
naming the thing." With that, I called her cursed devil, and bade her
get out of the room.

I think it was the first time that ever I was angry with Amy in all my
life; and when all was done, though she was a devilish jade in having
such a thought, yet it was all of it the effect of her excess of
affection and fidelity to me.

But this thing gave me a terrible shock, for it happened just after I
was married, and served to hasten my going over to Holland; for I would
not have been seen, so as to be known by the name of Roxana, no, not for
ten thousand pounds; it would have been enough to have ruined me to all
intents and purposes with my husband, and everybody else too; I might as
well have been the "German princess."

Well, I set Amy to work; and give Amy her due, she set all her wits to
work to find out which way this girl had her knowledge, but, more
particularly, how much knowledge she had--that is to say, what she
really knew, and what she did not know, for this was the main thing with
me; how she could say she knew who Madam Roxana was, and what notions
she had of that affair, was very mysterious to me, for it was certain
she could not have a right notion of me, because she would have it be
that Amy was her mother.

I scolded heartily at Amy for letting the girl ever know her, that is to
say, know her in this affair; for that she knew her could not be hid,
because she, as I might say, served Amy, or rather under Amy, in my
family, as is said before; but she (Amy) talked with her at first by
another person, and not by herself; and that secret came out by an
accident, as I have said above.

Amy was concerned at it as well as I, but could not help it; and though
it gave us great uneasiness, yet, as there was no remedy, we were bound
to make as little noise of it as we could, that it might go no farther.
I bade Amy punish the girl for it, and she did so, for she parted with
her in a huff, and told her she should see she was not her mother, for
that she could leave her just where she found her; and seeing she could
not be content to be served by the kindness of a friend, but that she
would needs make a mother of her, she would, for the future, be neither
mother or friend, and so bid her go to service again, and be a drudge as
she was before.

The poor girl cried most lamentably, but would not be beaten out of it
still; but that which dumbfoundered Amy more than all the rest was that
when she had berated the poor girl a long time, and could not beat her out
of it, and had, as I have observed, threatened to leave her, the girl
kept to what she said before, and put this turn to it again, that she
was sure, if Amy wa'n't, my Lady Roxana was her mother, and that she
would go find her out; adding, that she made no doubt but she could do
it, for she knew where to inquire the name of her new husband.

Amy came home with this piece of news in her mouth to me. I could easily
perceive when she came in that she was mad in her mind, and in a rage at
something or other, and was in great pain to get it out; for when she
came first in, my husband was in the room. However, Amy going up to
undress her, I soon made an excuse to follow her, and coming into the
room, "What the d--l is the matter, Amy?" says I; "I am sure you have
some bad news." "News," says Amy aloud; "ay, so I have; I think the d--l
is in that young wench. She'll ruin us all and herself too; there's no
quieting her." So she went on and told me all the particulars; but sure
nothing was so astonished as I was when she told me that the girl knew I
was married, that she knew my husband's name, and would endeavour to
find me out. I thought I should have sunk down at the very words. In the
middle of all my amazement, Amy starts up and runs about the room like a
distracted body. "I must put an end to it, that I will; I can't bear
it--I must murder her, I'll kill the b----;" and swears by her Maker, in
the most serious tone in the world, and then repeated it over three or
four times, walking to and again in the room. "I will, in short, I will
kill her, if there was not another wench in the world."

"Prithee hold thy tongue, Amy," says I; "why, thou art mad." "Ay, so I
am," says she, "stark mad; but I'll be the death of her for all that,
and then I shall be sober again." "But you sha'n't," says I, "you
sha'n't hurt a hair of her head; why, you ought to be hanged for what
you have done already, for having resolved on it is doing it; as to the
guilt of the fact you are a murderer already, as much as if you had done
it already."

"I know that," says Amy, "and it can be no worse; I'll put you out of
your pain, and her too; she shall never challenge you for her mother in
this world, whatever she may in the next." "Well, well," says I, "be
quiet, and do not talk thus, I can't bear it." So she grew a little
soberer after a while.

I must acknowledge, the notion of being discovered carried with it so
many frightful ideas, and hurried my thoughts so much, that I was scarce
myself any more than Amy, so dreadful a thing is a load of guilt upon
the mind.

And yet when Amy began the second time to talk thus abominably of
killing the poor child, of murdering her, and swore by her Maker that
she would, so that I began to see that she was in earnest, I was farther
terrified a great deal, and it helped to bring me to myself again in
other cases.

We laid our heads together then to see if it was possible to discover by
what means she had learned to talk so, and how she (I mean my girl) came
to know that her mother had married a husband; but it would not do, the
girl would acknowledge nothing, and gave but a very imperfect account of
things still, being disgusted to the last degree with Amy's leaving her
so abruptly as she did.

Well, Amy went to the house where the boy was; but it was all one, there
they had only heard a confused story of the lady somebody, they knew not
who, which the same wench had told them, but they gave no heed to it at
all. Amy told them how foolishly the girl had acted, and how she had
carried on the whimsey so far, in spite of all they could say to her;
that she had taken it so ill, she would see her no more, and so she
might e'en go to service again if she would, for she (Amy) would have
nothing to do with her unless she humbled herself and changed her note,
and that quickly too.

The good old gentleman, who had been the benefactor to them all, was
greatly concerned at it, and the good woman his wife was grieved beyond
all expressing, and begged her ladyship (meaning Amy), not to resent it;
they promised, too, they would talk with her about it, and the old
gentlewoman added, with some astonishment, "Sure she cannot be such a
fool but she will be prevailed with to hold her tongue, when she has it
from your own mouth that you are not her mother, and sees that it
disobliges your ladyship to have her insist upon it." And so Amy came
away with some expectation that it would be stopped here.

But the girl was such a fool for all that, and persisted in it
obstinately, notwithstanding all they could say to her; nay, her sister
begged and entreated her not to play the fool, for that it would ruin
her too, and that the lady (meaning Amy) would abandon them both.

Well, notwithstanding this, she insisted, I say, upon it, and which was
worse, the longer it lasted the more she began to drop Amy's ladyship,
and would have it that the Lady Roxana was her mother, and that she had
made some inquiries about it, and did not doubt but she should find her
out.

When it was come to this, and we found there was nothing to be done with
the girl, but that she was so obstinately bent upon the search after me,
that she ventured to forfeit all she had in view; I say, when I found it
was come to this, I began to be more serious in my preparations of my
going beyond sea, and particularly, it gave me some reason to fear that
there was something in it. But the following accident put me beside all
my measures, and struck me into the greatest confusion that ever I was
in my life.

I was so near going abroad that my spouse and I had taken measures for
our going off; and because I would be sure not to go too public, but so
as to take away all possibility of being seen, I had made some exception
to my spouse against going in the ordinary public passage boats. My
pretence to him was the promiscuous crowds in those vessels, want of
convenience, and the like. So he took the hint, and found me out an
English merchant-ship, which was bound for Rotterdam, and getting soon
acquainted with the master, he hired his whole ship, that is to say, his
great cabin, for I do not mean his ship for freight, that so we had all
the conveniences possible for our passage; and all things being near
ready, he brought home the captain one day to dinner with him, that I
might see him, and be acquainted a little with him. So we came after
dinner to talk of the ship and the conveniences on board, and the
captain pressed me earnestly to come on board and see the ship,
intimating that he would treat us as well as he could; and in discourse
I happened to say I hoped he had no other passengers. He said no, he had
not; but, he said, his wife had courted him a good while to let her go
over to Holland with him, for he always used that trade, but he never
could think of venturing all he had in one bottom; but if I went with
him he thought to take her and her kinswoman along with him this voyage,
that they might both wait upon me; and so added, that if we would do him
the honour to dine on board the next day, he would bring his wife on
board, the better to make us welcome.

Who now could have believed the devil had any snare at the bottom of all
this? or that I was in any danger on such an occasion, so remote and out
of the way as this was? But the event was the oddest that could be
thought of. As it happened, Amy was not at home when we accepted this
invitation, and so she was left out of the company; but instead of Amy,
we took our honest, good-humoured, never-to-be-omitted friend the
Quaker, one of the best creatures that ever lived, sure; and who,
besides a thousand good qualities unmixed with one bad one, was
particularly excellent for being the best company in the world; though
I think I had carried Amy too, if she had not been engaged in this
unhappy girl's affair. For on a sudden the girl was lost, and no news
was to be heard of her; and Amy had haunted her to every place she could
think of, that it was likely to find her in; but all the news she could
hear of her was, that she was gone to an old comrade's house of hers,
which she called sister, and who was married to a master of a ship, who
lived at Redriff; and even this the jade never told me. It seems, when
this girl was directed by Amy to get her some breeding, go to the
boarding-school, and the like, she was recommended to a boarding-school
at Camberwell, and there she contracted an acquaintance with a young
lady (so they are all called), her bedfellow, that they called sisters,
and promised never to break off their acquaintance.

But judge you what an unaccountable surprise I must be in when I came on
board the ship and was brought into the captain's cabin, or what they
call it, the great cabin of the ship, to see his lady or wife, and
another young person with her, who, when I came to see her near hand,
was my old cook-maid in the Pall Mall, and, as appeared by the sequel of
the story, was neither more or less than my own daughter. That I knew
her was out of doubt; for though she had not had opportunity to see me
very often, yet I had often seen her, as I must needs, being in my own
family so long.

If ever I had need of courage, and a full presence of mind, it was now;
it was the only valuable secret in the world to me, all depended upon
this occasion; if the girl knew me, I was undone; and to discover any
surprise or disorder had been to make her know me, or guess it, and
discover herself.

I was once going to feign a swooning and fainting away, and so falling
on the ground, or floor, put them all into a hurry and fright, and by
that means to get an opportunity to be continually holding something to
my nose to smell to, and so hold my hand or my handkerchief, or both,
before my mouth; then pretend I could not bear the smell of the ship, or
the closeness of the cabin. But that would have been only to remove into
a clearer air upon the quarter-deck, where we should, with it, have had
a clearer light too; and if I had pretended the smell of the ship, it
would have served only to have carried us all on shore to the captain's
house, which was hard by; for the ship lay so close to the shore, that
we only walked over a plank to go on board, and over another ship which
lay within her; so this not appearing feasible, and the thought not
being two minutes old, there was no time, for the two ladies rose up,
and we saluted, so that I was bound to come so near my girl as to kiss
her, which I would not have done had it been possible to have avoided
it, but there was no room to escape.

I cannot but take notice here, that notwithstanding there was a secret
horror upon my mind, and I was ready to sink when I came close to her to
salute her, yet it was a secret inconceivable pleasure to me when I
kissed her, to know that I kissed my own child, my own flesh and blood,
born of my body, and who I had never kissed since I took the fatal
farewell of them all, with a million of tears, and a heart almost dead
with grief, when Amy and the good woman took them all away, and went
with them to Spitalfields. No pen can describe, no words can express, I
say, the strange impression which this thing made upon my spirits. I
felt something shoot through my blood, my heart fluttered, my head
flashed, and was dizzy, and all within me, as I thought, turned about,
and much ado I had not to abandon myself to an excess of passion at the
first sight of her, much more when my lips touched her face. I thought I
must have taken her in my arms and kissed her again a thousand times,
whether I would or no.

But I roused up my judgment, and shook it off, and with infinite
uneasiness in my mind, I sat down. You will not wonder if upon this
surprise I was not conversable for some minutes, and that the disorder
had almost discovered itself. I had a complication of severe things upon
me, I could not conceal my disorder without the utmost difficulty, and
yet upon my concealing it depended the whole of my prosperity; so I used
all manner of violence with myself to prevent the mischief which was at
the door.

Well, I saluted her, but as I went first forward to the captain's lady,
who was at the farther end of the cabin, towards the light, I had the
occasion offered to stand with my back to the light, when I turned
about to her, who stood more on my left hand, so that she had not a fair
sight of me, though I was so near her. I trembled, and knew neither what
I did or said, I was in the utmost extremity, between so many particular
circumstances as lay upon me, for I was to conceal my disorder from
everybody at the utmost peril, and at the same time expected everybody
would discern it. I was to expect she would discover that she knew me,
and yet was, by all means possible, to prevent it. I was to conceal
myself, if possible, and yet had not the least room to do anything
towards it. In short, there was no retreat, no shifting anything off, no
avoiding or preventing her having a full sight of me, nor was there any
counterfeiting my voice, for then my husband would have perceived it. In
short, there was not the least circumstance that offered me any
assistance, or any favourable thing to help me in this exigence.

After I had been upon the rack for near half-an-hour, during which I
appeared stiff and reserved, and a little too formal, my spouse and the
captain fell into discourses about the ship and the sea, and business
remote from us women; and by-and-by the captain carried him out upon the
quarter-deck, and left us all by ourselves in the great cabin. Then we
began to be a little freer one with another, and I began to be a little
revived by a sudden fancy of my own--namely, I thought I perceived that
the girl did not know me, and the chief reason of my having such a
notion was because I did not perceive the least disorder in her
countenance, or the least change in her carriage, no confusion, no
hesitation in her discourse; nor, which I had my eye particularly upon,
did I observe that she fixed her eyes much upon me, that is to say, not
singling me out to look steadily at me, as I thought would have been the
case, but that she rather singled out my friend the Quaker, and chatted
with her on several things; but I observed, too, that it was all about
indifferent matters.

This greatly encouraged me, and I began to be a little cheerful; but I
was knocked down again as with a thunderclap, when turning to the
captain's wife, and discoursing of me, she said to her, "Sister, I
cannot but think my lady to be very much like such a person." Then she
named the person, and the captain's wife said she thought so too. The
girl replied again, she was sure she had seen me before, but she could
not recollect where; I answered (though her speech was not directed to
me) that I fancied she had not seen me before in England, but asked if
she had lived in Holland. She said, No, no, she had never been out of
England, and I added, that she could not then have known me in England,
unless it was very lately, for I had lived at Rotterdam a great while.
This carried me out of that part of the broil pretty well, and to make
it go off better, when a little Dutch boy came into the cabin, who
belonged to the captain, and who I easily perceived to be Dutch, I
jested and talked Dutch to him, and was merry about the boy, that is to
say, as merry as the consternation I was still in would let me be.

However, I began to be thoroughly convinced by this time that the girl
did not know me, which was an infinite satisfaction to me, or, at least,
that though she had some notion of me, yet that she did not think
anything about my being who I was, and which, perhaps, she would have
been as glad to have known as I would have been surprised if she had;
indeed, it was evident that, had she suspected anything of the truth,
she would not have been able to have concealed it.

Thus this meeting went off, and, you may be sure, I was resolved, if
once I got off of it, she should never see me again to revive her fancy;
but I was mistaken there too, as you shall hear. After we had been on
board, the captain's lady carried us home to her house, which was but
just on shore, and treated us there again very handsomely, and made us
promise that we would come again and see her before we went to concert
our affairs for the voyage and the like, for she assured us that both
she and her sister went the voyage at that time for our company, and I
thought to myself, "Then you'll never go the voyage at all;" for I saw
from that moment that it would be no way convenient for my ladyship to
go with them, for that frequent conversation might bring me to her mind,
and she would certainly claim her kindred to me in a few days, as indeed
would have been the case.

It is hardly possible for me to conceive what would have been our part
in this affair had my woman Amy gone with me on board this ship; it had
certainly blown up the whole affair, and I must for ever after have been
this girl's vassal, that is to say, have let her into the secret, and
trusted to her keeping it too, or have been exposed and undone. The very
thought filled me with horror.

But I was not so unhappy neither, as it fell out, for Amy was not with
us, and that was my deliverance indeed; yet we had another chance to get
over still. As I resolved to put off the voyage, so I resolved to put
off the visit, you may be sure, going upon this principle, namely, that
I was fixed in it that the girl had seen her last of me, and should
never see me more.

However, to bring myself well off, and, withal, to see, if I could, a
little farther into the matter, I sent my friend the Quaker to the
captain's lady to make the visit promised, and to make my excuse that I
could not possibly wait on her, for that I was very much out of order;
and in the end of the discourse I bade her insinuate to them that she
was afraid I should not be able to get ready to go the voyage as soon as
the captain would be obliged to go, and that perhaps we might put it off
to his next voyage. I did not let the Quaker into any other reason for
it than that I was indisposed; and not knowing what other face to put
upon that part, I made her believe that I thought I was a-breeding.

It was easy to put that into her head, and she of course hinted to the
captain's lady that she found me so very ill that she was afraid I would
miscarry, and then, to be sure, I could not think of going.

She went, and she managed that part very dexterously, as I knew she
would, though she knew not a word of the grand reason of my
indisposition; but I was all sunk and dead-hearted again when she told
me she could not understand the meaning of one thing in her visit,
namely, that the young woman, as she called her, that was with the
captain's lady, and who she called sister, was most impertinently
inquisitive into things; as who I was? how long I had been in England?
where I had lived? and the like; and that, above all the rest, she
inquired if I did not live once at the other end of the town.

"I thought her inquiries so out of the way," says the honest Quaker,
"that I gave her not the least satisfaction; but as I saw by thy answers
on board the ship, when she talked of thee, that thou didst not incline
to let her be acquainted with thee, so I was resolved that she should
not be much the wiser for me; and when she asked me if thou ever
lived'st here or there, I always said, No, but that thou wast a Dutch
lady, and was going home again to thy family, and lived abroad."

I thanked her very heartily for that part, and indeed she served me in
it more than I let her know she did: in a word, she thwarted the girl so
cleverly, that if she had known the whole affair she could not have
done it better.

But, I must acknowledge, all this put me upon the rack again, and I was
quite discouraged, not at all doubting but that the jade had a right
scent of things, and that she knew and remembered my face, but had
artfully concealed her knowledge of me till she might perhaps do it more
to my disadvantage. I told all this to Amy, for she was all the relief I
had. The poor soul (Amy) was ready to hang herself, that, as she said,
she had been the occasion of it all; and that if I was ruined (which was
the word I always used to her), she had ruined me; and she tormented
herself about it so much, that I was sometimes fain to comfort her and
myself too.

What Amy vexed herself at was, chiefly, that she should be surprised so
by the girl, as she called her; I mean surprised into a discovery of
herself to the girl; which indeed was a false step of Amy's, and so I
had often told her. But it was to no purpose to talk of that now, the
business was, how to get clear of the girl's suspicions, and of the girl
too, for it looked more threatening every day than other; and if I was
uneasy at what Amy had told me of her rambling and rattling to her
(Amy), I had a thousand times as much reason to be uneasy now, when she
had chopped upon me so unhappily as this; and not only had seen my face,
but knew too where I lived, what name I went by, and the like.

And I am not come to the worst of it yet neither, for a few days after
my friend the Quaker had made her visit, and excused me on the account
of indisposition, as if they had done it in over and above kindness,
because they had been told I was not well, they come both directly to my
lodgings to visit me: the captain's wife and my daughter (who she called
sister), and the captain, to show them the place; the captain only
brought them to the door, put them in, and went away upon some business.

Had not the kind Quaker, in a lucky moment, come running in before them,
they had not only clapped in upon me, in the parlour, as it had been a
surprise, but which would have been a thousand times worse, had seen Amy
with me; I think if that had happened, I had had no remedy but to take
the girl by herself, and have made myself known to her, which would have
been all distraction.

But the Quaker, a lucky creature to me, happened to see them come to the
door, before they rung the bell, and instead of going to let them in,
came running in with some confusion in her countenance, and told me who
was a-coming; at which Amy run first and I after her, and bid the Quaker
come up as soon as she had let them in.

I was going to bid her deny me, but it came into my thoughts, that
having been represented so much out of order, it would have looked very
odd; besides, I knew the honest Quaker, though she would do anything
else for me, would not lie for me, and it would have been hard to have
desired it of her.

After she had let them in, and brought them into the parlour, she came
up to Amy and I, who were hardly out of the fright, and yet were
congratulating one another that Amy was not surprised again.

They paid their visit in form, and I received them as formally, but took
occasion two or three times to hint that I was so ill that I was afraid
I should not be able to go to Holland, at least not so soon as the
captain must go off; and made my compliment how sorry I was to be
disappointed of the advantage of their company and assistance in the
voyage; and sometimes I talked as if I thought I might stay till the
captain returned, and would be ready to go again; then the Quaker put
in, that then I might be too far gone, meaning with child, that I should
not venture at all; and then (as if she should be pleased with it)
added, she hoped I would stay and lie in at her house; so as this
carried its own face with it, 'twas well enough.

But it was now high time to talk of this to my husband, which, however,
was not the greatest difficulty before me; for after this and other chat
had taken up some time, the young fool began her tattle again; and two
or three times she brought it in, that I was so like a lady that she had
the honour to know at the other end of the town, that she could not put
that lady out of her mind when I was by, and once or twice I fancied the
girl was ready to cry; by and by she was at it again, and at last I
plainly saw tears in her eyes; upon which I asked her if the lady was
dead, because she seemed to be in some concern for her. She made me much
easier by her answer than ever she did before; she said she did not
really know, but she believed she was dead.

This, I say, a little relieved my thoughts, but I was soon down again;
for, after some time, the jade began to grow talkative; and as it was
plain that she had told all that her head could retain of Roxana, and
the days of joy which I had spent at that part of the town, another
accident had like to have blown us all up again.

I was in a kind of dishabille when they came, having on a loose robe,
like a morning-gown, but much after the Italian way; and I had not
altered it when I went up, only dressed my head a little; and as I had
been represented as having been lately very ill, so the dress was
becoming enough for a chamber.

This morning vest, or robe, call it as you please, was more shaped to
the body than we wear them since, showing the body in its true shape,
and perhaps a little too plainly if it had been to be worn where any men
were to come; but among ourselves it was well enough, especially for hot
weather; the colour was green, figured, and the stuff a French damask,
very rich.

This gown or vest put the girl's tongue a running again, and her sister,
as she called her, prompted it; for as they both admired my vest, and
were taken up much about the beauty of the dress, the charming damask,
the noble trimming, and the like, my girl puts in a word to the sister
(captain's wife), "This is just such a thing as I told you," says she,
"the lady danced in." "What," says the captain's wife, "the Lady Roxana
that you told me of? Oh! that's a charming story," says she, "tell it my
lady." I could not avoid saying so too, though from my soul I wished her
in heaven for but naming it; nay, I won't say but if she had been
carried t'other way it had been much as one to me, if I could but have
been rid of her, and her story too, for when she came to describe the
Turkish dress, it was impossible but the Quaker, who was a sharp,
penetrating creature, should receive the impression in a more dangerous
manner than the girl, only that indeed she was not so dangerous a
person; for if she had known it all, I could more freely have trusted
her than I could the girl, by a great deal, nay, I should have been
perfectly easy in her.

However, as I have said, her talk made me dreadfully uneasy, and the
more when the captain's wife mentioned but the name of Roxana. What my
face might do towards betraying me I knew not, because I could not see
myself, but my heart beat as if it would have jumped out at my mouth,
and my passion was so great, that, for want of vent, I thought I should
have burst. In a word, I was in a kind of a silent rage, for the force I
was under of restraining my passion was such as I never felt the like
of. I had no vent, nobody to open myself to, or to make a complaint to,
for my relief; I durst not leave the room by any means, for then she
would have told all the story in my absence, and I should have been
perpetually uneasy to know what she had said, or had not said; so that,
in a word, I was obliged to sit and hear her tell all the story of
Roxana, that is to say, of myself, and not know at the same time whether
she was in earnest or in jest, whether she knew me or no; or, in short,
whether I was to be exposed, or not exposed.

She began only in general with telling where she lived, what a place she
had of it, how gallant a company her lady had always had in the house;
how they used to sit up all night in the house gaming and dancing; what
a fine lady her mistress was, and what a vast deal of money the upper
servants got; as for her, she said, her whole business was in the next
house, so that she got but little, except one night that there was
twenty guineas given to be divided among the servants, when, she said,
she got two guineas and a half for her share.

She went on, and told them how many servants there was, and how they
were ordered; but, she said, there was one Mrs. Amy who was over them
all; and that she, being the lady's favourite, got a great deal. She did
not know, she said, whether Amy was her Christian name or her surname,
but she supposed it was her surname; that they were told she got
threescore pieces of gold at one time, being the same night that the
rest of the servants had the twenty guineas divided among them.

I put in at that word, and said it was a vast deal to give away. "Why,"
says I, "it was a portion for a servant." "O madam!" says she, "it was
nothing to what she got afterwards; we that were servants hated her
heartily for it; that is to say, we wished it had been our lot in her
stead." Then I said again, "Why, it was enough to get her a good
husband, and settle her for the world, if she had sense to manage it."
"So it might, to be sure, madam," says she, "for we were told she laid
up above £500; but, I suppose, Mrs. Amy was too sensible that her
character would require a good portion to put her off."

"Oh," said I, "if that was the case it was another thing."

"Nay," says she, "I don't know, but they talked very much of a young
lord that was very great with her."

"And pray what came of her at last?" said I, for I was willing to hear a
little (seeing she would talk of it) what she had to say, as well of Amy
as of myself.

"I don't know, madam," said she, "I never heard of her for several
years, till t'other day I happened to see her."

"Did you indeed?" says I (and made mighty strange of it); "what! and in
rags, it may be," said I; "that's often the end of such creatures."

"Just the contrary, madam," says she. "She came to visit an acquaintance
of mine, little thinking, I suppose, to see me, and, I assure you, she
came in her coach."

"In her coach!" said I; "upon my word, she had made her market then; I
suppose she made hay while the sun shone. Was she married, pray?"

"I believe she had been married, madam," says she, "but it seems she had
been at the East Indies; and if she was married, it was there, to be
sure. I think she said she had good luck in the Indies."

"That is, I suppose," said I, "had buried her husband there."

"I understood it so, madam," says she, "and that she had got his
estate."

"Was that her good luck?" said I; "it might be good to her, as to the
money indeed, but it was but the part of a jade to call it good luck."

Thus far our discourse of Mrs. Amy went, and no farther, for she knew no
more of her; but then the Quaker unhappily, though undesignedly, put in
a question, which the honest good-humoured creature would have been far
from doing if she had known that I had carried on the discourse of Amy
on purpose to drop Roxana out of the conversation.

But I was not to be made easy too soon. The Quaker put in, "But I think
thou saidst something was behind of thy mistress; what didst thou call
her? Roxana, was it not? Pray, what became of her?"

"Ay, ay, Roxana," says the captain's wife; "pray, sister, let's hear the
story of Roxana; it will divert my lady, I'm sure."

"That's a damned lie," said I to myself; "if you knew how little 't
would divert me, you would have too much advantage over me." Well, I saw
no remedy, but the story must come on, so I prepared to hear the worst
of it.

"Roxana!" says she, "I know not what to say of her; she was so much
above us, and so seldom seen, that we could know little of her but by
report; but we did sometimes see her too; she was a charming woman
indeed, and the footmen used to say that she was to be sent for to
court."

"To court!" said I; "why, she was at court, wasn't she? the Pall Mall is
not far from Whitehall."

"Yes, madam," says she, "but I mean another way."

"I understand thee," says the Quaker; "thou meanest, I suppose, to be
mistress to the king."

"Yes, madam," said she.

I cannot help confessing what a reserve of pride still was left in me;
and though I dreaded the sequel of the story, yet when she talked how
handsome and how fine a lady this Roxana was, I could not help being
pleased and tickled with it, and put in questions two or three times of
how handsome she was; and was she really so fine a woman as they talked
of; and the like, on purpose to hear her repeat what the people's
opinion of me was, and how I had behaved.

"Indeed," says she, at last, "she was a most beautiful creature as ever
I saw in my life." "But then," said I, "you never had the opportunity to
see her but when she was set out to the best advantage."

"Yes, yes, madam," says she, "I have seen her several times in her
_déshabille_. And I can assure you, she was a very fine woman; and that
which was more still, everybody said she did not paint."

This was still agreeable to me one way; but there was a devilish sting
in the tail of it all, and this last article was one; wherein she said
she had seen me several times in my _déshabille_. This put me in mind
that then she must certainly know me, and it would come out at last;
which was death to me but to think of.

"Well, but, sister," says the captain's wife, "tell my lady about the
ball; that's the best of all the story; and of Roxana's dancing in a
fine outlandish dress."

"That's one of the brightest parts of her story indeed," says the girl.
"The case was this: we had balls and meetings in her ladyship's
apartments every week almost; but one time my lady invited all the
nobles to come such a time, and she would give them a ball; and there
was a vast crowd indeed," says she.

"I think you said the king was there, sister, didn't you?"

"No, madam," says she, "that was the second time, when they said the
king had heard how finely the Turkish lady danced, and that he was
there to see her; but the king, if his Majesty was there, came
disguised."

"That is, what they call incog.," says my friend the Quaker; "thou canst
not think the king would disguise himself." "Yes," says the girl, "it
was so; he did not come in public with his guards, but we all knew which
was the king well enough, that is to say, which they said was the king."

"Well," says the captain's wife, "about the Turkish dress; pray let us
hear that." "Why," says she, "my lady sat in a fine little drawing-room,
which opened into the great room, and where she received the compliments
of the company; and when the dancing began, a great lord," says she, "I
forget who they called him (but he was a very great lord or duke, I
don't know which), took her out, and danced with her; but after a while,
my lady on a sudden shut the drawing-room, and ran upstairs with her
woman, Mrs. Amy; and though she did not stay long (for I suppose she had
contrived it all beforehand), she came down dressed in the strangest
figure that ever I saw in my life; but it was exceeding fine."

Here she went on to describe the dress, as I have done already; but did
it so exactly, that I was surprised at the manner of her telling it;
there was not a circumstance of it left out.

I was now under a new perplexity, for this young slut gave so complete
an account of everything in the dress, that my friend the Quaker
coloured at it, and looked two or three times at me, to see if I did not
do so too; for (as she told me afterwards) she immediately perceived it
was the same dress that she had seen me have on, as I have said before.
However, as she saw I took no notice of it, she kept her thought private
to herself; and I did so too, as well as I could.

I put in two or three times, that she had a good memory, that could be
so particular in every part of such a thing.

"Oh, madam!" says she, "we that were servants, stood by ourselves in a
corner, but so as we could see more than some strangers; besides," says
she, "it was all our conversation for several days in the family, and
what one did not observe another did." "Why," says I to her, "this was
no Persian dress; only, I suppose your lady was some French comedian,
that is to say, a stage Amazon, that put on a counterfeit dress to
please the company, such as they used in the play of Tamerlane at Paris,
or some such."

"No, indeed, madam," says she, "I assure you my lady was no actress; she
was a fine modest lady, fit to be a princess; everybody said if she was
a mistress, she was fit to be a mistress to none but the king; and they
talked her up for the king as if it had really been so. Besides, madam,"
says she, "my lady danced a Turkish dance; all the lords and gentry said
it was so; and one of them swore he had seen it danced in Turkey
himself, so that it could not come from the theatre at Paris; and then
the name Roxana," says she, "was a Turkish name."

"Well," said I, "but that was not your lady's name, I suppose?"

"No, no, madam," said she, "I know that. I know my lady's name and
family very well; Roxana was not her name, that's true, indeed."

Here she run me aground again, for I durst not ask her what was Roxana's
real name, lest she had really dealt with the devil, and had boldly
given my own name in for answer; so that I was still more and more
afraid that the girl had really gotten the secret somewhere or other;
though I could not imagine neither how that could be.

In a word, I was sick of the discourse, and endeavoured many ways to put
an end to it, but it was impossible; for the captain's wife, who called
her sister, prompted her, and pressed her to tell it, most ignorantly
thinking that it would be a pleasant tale to all of us.

Two or three times the Quaker put in, that this Lady Roxana had a good
stock of assurance; and that it was likely, if she had been in Turkey,
she had lived with, or been kept by, some great bashaw there. But still
she would break in upon all such discourse, and fly out into the most
extravagant praises of her mistress, the famed Roxana. I run her down as
some scandalous woman; that it was not possible to be otherwise; but she
would not hear of it; her lady was a person of such and such
qualifications that nothing but an angel was like her, to be sure; and
yet, after all she could say, her own account brought her down to this,
that, in short, her lady kept little less than a gaming ordinary; or, as
it would be called in the times since that, an assembly for gallantry
and play.

All this while I was very uneasy, as I said before, and yet the whole
story went off again without any discovery, only that I seemed a little
concerned that she should liken me to this gay lady, whose character I
pretended to run down very much, even upon the foot of her own relation.

But I was not at the end of my mortifications yet, neither, for now my
innocent Quaker threw out an unhappy expression, which put me upon the
tenters again. Says she to me, "This lady's habit, I fancy, is just such
a one as thine, by the description of it;" and then turning to the
captain's wife, says she, "I fancy my friend has a finer Turkish or
Persian dress, a great deal." "Oh," says the girl, "'tis impossible to
be finer; my lady's," says she, "was all covered with gold and diamonds;
her hair and head-dress, I forget the name they gave it," said she,
"shone like the stars, there were so many jewels in it."

I never wished my good friend the Quaker out of my company before now;
but, indeed, I would have given some guineas to have been rid of her
just now; for beginning to be curious in the comparing the two dresses,
she innocently began a description of mine; and nothing terrified me so
much as the apprehension lest she should importune me to show it, which
I was resolved I would never agree to. But before it came to this, she
pressed my girl to describe the tyhaia, or head-dress, which she did so
cleverly that the Quaker could not help saying mine was just such a one;
and after several other similitudes, all very vexatious to me, out comes
the kind motion to me to let the ladies see my dress; and they joined
their eager desires of it, even to importunity.

I desired to be excused, though I had little to say at first why I
declined it; but at last it came into my head to say it was packed up
with my other clothes that I had least occasion for, in order to be sent
on board the captain's ship; but that if we lived to come to Holland
together (which, by the way, I resolved should never happen), then, I
told them, at unpacking my clothes, they should see me dressed in it;
but they must not expect I should dance in it, like the Lady Roxana in
all her fine things.

This carried it off pretty well; and getting over this, got over most of
the rest, and I began to be easy again; and, in a word, that I may
dismiss the story too, as soon as may be, I got rid at last of my
visitors, who I had wished gone two hours sooner than they intended it.

As soon as they were gone, I ran up to Amy, and gave vent to my passions
by telling her the whole story, and letting her see what mischiefs one
false step of hers had like, unluckily, to have involved us all in;
more, perhaps, than we could ever have lived to get through. Amy was
sensible of it enough, and was just giving her wrath a vent another way,
viz., by calling the poor girl all the damned jades and fools (and
sometimes worse names) that she could think of, in the middle of which
up comes my honest, good Quaker, and put an end to our discourse. The
Quaker came in smiling (for she was always soberly cheerful). "Well,"
says she, "thou art delivered at last; I come to joy thee of it; I
perceived thou wert tired grievously of thy visitors."

"Indeed," says I, "so I was; that foolish young girl held us all in a
Canterbury story; I thought she would never have done with it." "Why,
truly, I thought she was very careful to let thee know she was but a
cook-maid." "Ay," says I, "and at a gaming-house, or gaming-ordinary,
and at t'other end of the town too; all which (by the way) she might
know would add very little to her good name among us citizens."

"I can't think," says the Quaker, "but she had some other drift in that
long discourse; there's something else in her head," says she, "I am
satisfied of that." Thought I, "Are you satisfied of it? I am sure I am
the less satisfied for that; at least 'tis but small satisfaction to me
to hear you say so. What can this be?" says I; "and when will my
uneasiness have an end?" But this was silent, and to myself, you may be
sure. But in answer to my friend the Quaker, I returned by asking her a
question or two about it; as what she thought was in it, and why she
thought there was anything in it. "For," says I, "she can have nothing
in it relating to me."

"Nay," says the kind Quaker, "if she had any view towards thee, that's
no business of mine; and I should be far from desiring thee to inform
me."

This alarmed me again; not that I feared trusting the good-humoured
creature with it, if there had been anything of just suspicion in her;
but this affair was a secret I cared not to communicate to anybody.
However, I say, this alarmed me a little; for as I had concealed
everything from her, I was willing to do so still; but as she could not
but gather up abundance of things from the girl's discourse, which
looked towards me, so she was too penetrating to be put off with such
answers as might stop another's mouth. Only there was this double
felicity in it, first, that she was not inquisitive to know or find
anything out, and not dangerous if she had known the whole story. But,
as I say, she could not but gather up several circumstances from the
girl's discourse, as particularly the name of Amy, and the several
descriptions of the Turkish dress which my friend the Quaker had seen,
and taken so much notice of, as I have said above.

As for that, I might have turned it off by jesting with Amy, and asking
her who she lived with before she came to live with me. But that would
not do, for we had unhappily anticipated that way of talking, by having
often talked how long Amy had lived with me; and, which was still worse,
by having owned formerly that I had had lodgings in the Pall Mall; so
that all those things corresponded too well. There was only one thing
that helped me out with the Quaker, and that was the girl's having
reported how rich Mrs. Amy was grown, and that she kept her coach. Now,
as there might be many more Mrs. Amys besides mine, so it was not likely
to be my Amy, because she was far from such a figure as keeping her
coach; and this carried it off from the suspicions which the good
friendly Quaker might have in her head.

But as to what she imagined the girl had in her head, there lay more
real difficulty in that part a great deal, and I was alarmed at it very
much, for my friend the Quaker told me that she observed the girl was in
a great passion when she talked of the habit, and more when I had been
importuned to show her mine, but declined it. She said she several times
perceived her to be in disorder, and to restrain herself with great
difficulty; and once or twice she muttered to herself that she had found
it out, or that she would find it out, she could not tell whether; and
that she often saw tears in her eyes; that when I said my suit of
Turkish clothes was put up, but that she should see it when we arrived
in Holland, she heard her say softly she would go over on purpose then.

After she had ended her observations, I added: "I observed, too, that
the girl talked and looked oddly, and that she was mighty inquisitive,
but I could not imagine what it was she aimed at." "Aimed at," says the
Quaker, "'tis plain to me what she aims at. She believes thou art the
same Lady Roxana that danced in the Turkish vest, but she is not
certain." "Does she believe so?" says I; "if I had thought that, I would
have put her out of her pain." "Believe so!" says the Quaker; "yes, and
I began to think so too, and should have believed so still, if thou
had'st not satisfied me to the contrary by thy taking no notice of it,
and by what thou hast said since." "Should you have believed so?" said I
warmly; "I am very sorry for that. Why, would you have taken me for an
actress, or a French stage-player?" "No," says the good kind creature,
"thou carriest it too far; as soon as thou madest thy reflections upon
her, I knew it could not be; but who could think any other when she
described the Turkish dress which thou hast here, with the head-tire and
jewels, and when she named thy maid Amy too, and several other
circumstances concurring? I should certainly have believed it," said
she, "if thou hadst not contradicted it; but as soon as I heard thee
speak, I concluded it was otherwise." "That was very kind," said I, "and
I am obliged to you for doing me so much justice; it is more, it seems,
than that young talking creature does." "Nay," says the Quaker, "indeed
she does not do thee justice; for she as certainly believes it still as
ever she did." "Does she?" said I. "Ay," says the Quaker; "and I warrant
thee she'll make thee another visit about it." "Will she?" said I;
"then I believe I shall downright affront her." "No, thou shalt not
affront her," says she (full of her good-humour and temper), "I'll take
that part off thy hands, for I'll affront her for thee, and not let her
see thee." I thought that was a very kind offer, but was at a loss how
she would be able to do it; and the thought of seeing her there again
half distracted me, not knowing what temper she would come in, much less
what manner to receive her in; but my fast friend and constant
comforter, the Quaker, said she perceived the girl was impertinent, and
that I had no inclination to converse with her, and she was resolved I
should not be troubled with her. But I shall have occasion to say more
of this presently, for this girl went farther yet than I thought she
had.

It was now time, as I said before, to take measures with my husband, in
order to put off my voyage; so I fell into talk with him one morning as
he was dressing, and while I was in bed. I pretended I was very ill; and
as I had but too easy a way to impose upon him, because he so absolutely
believed everything I said, so I managed my discourse as that he should
understand by it I was a-breeding, though I did not tell him so.

However, I brought it about so handsomely that, before he went out of
the room, he came and sat down by my bedside, and began to talk very
seriously to me upon the subject of my being so every day ill, and
that, as he hoped I was with child, he would have me consider well of
it, whether I had not best alter my thoughts of the voyage to Holland;
for that being sea-sick, and which was worse, if a storm should happen,
might be very dangerous to me. And after saying abundance of the kindest
things that the kindest of husbands in the world could say, he concluded
that it was his request to me, that I would not think any more of going
till after all should be over; but that I would, on the contrary,
prepare to lie-in where I was, and where I knew, as well as he, I could
be very well provided, and very well assisted.

This was just what I wanted, for I had, as you have heard, a thousand
good reasons why I should put off the voyage, especially with that
creature in company; but I had a mind the putting it off should be at
his motion, not my own; and he came into it of himself, just as I would
have had it. This gave me an opportunity to hang back a little, and to
seem as if I was unwilling. I told him I could not abide to put him to
difficulties and perplexities in his business; that now he had hired the
great cabin in the ship, and, perhaps, paid some of the money, and, it
may be, taken freight for goods; and to make him break it all off again
would be a needless charge to him, or, perhaps, a damage to the captain.

As to that, he said, it was not to be named, and he would not allow it
to be any consideration at all; that he could easily pacify the captain
of the ship by telling him the reason of it, and that if he did make
him some satisfaction for the disappointment, it should not be much.

"But, my dear," says I, "you ha'n't heard me say I am with child,
neither can I say so; and if it should not be so at last, then I shall
have made a fine piece of work of it indeed; besides," says I, "the two
ladies, the captain's wife and her sister, they depend upon our going
over, and have made great preparations, and all in compliment to me;
what must I say to them?"

"Well, my dear," says he, "if you should not be with child, though I
hope you are, yet there is no harm done; the staying three or four
months longer in England will be no damage to me, and we can go when we
please, when we are sure you are not with child, or, when it appearing
that you are with child, you shall be down and up again; and as for the
captain's wife and sister, leave that part to me; I'll answer for it
there shall be no quarrel raised upon that subject. I'll make your
excuse to them by the captain himself, so all will be well enough there,
I'll warrant you."

This was as much as I could desire, and thus it rested for awhile. I had
indeed some anxious thoughts about this impertinent girl, but believed
that putting off the voyage would have put an end to it all, so I began
to be pretty easy; but I found myself mistaken, for I was brought to the
point of destruction by her again, and that in the most unaccountable
manner imaginable.

My husband, as he and I had agreed, meeting the captain of the ship,
took the freedom to tell him that he was afraid he must disappoint him,
for that something had fallen out which had obliged him to alter his
measures, and that his family could not be ready to go time enough for
him.

"I know the occasion, sir," says the captain; "I hear your lady has got
a daughter more than she expected; I give you joy of it." "What do you
mean by that?" says my spouse. "Nay, nothing," says the captain, "but
what I hear the women tattle over the tea-table. I know nothing, but
that you don't go the voyage upon it, which I am sorry for; but you know
your own affairs," added the captain, "that's no business of mine."

"Well, but," says my husband, "I must make you some satisfaction for the
disappointment," and so pulls out his money. "No, no," says the captain;
and so they fell to straining their compliments one upon another; but,
in short, my spouse gave him three or four guineas, and made him take
it. And so the first discourse went off again, and they had no more of
it.

But it did not go off so easily with me, for now, in a word, the clouds
began to thicken about me, and I had alarms on every side. My husband
told me what the captain had said, but very happily took it that the
captain had brought a tale by halves, and having heard it one way, had
told it another; and that neither could he understand the captain,
neither did the captain understand himself, so he contented himself to
tell me, he said, word for word, as the captain delivered it.

How I kept my husband from discovering my disorder you shall hear
presently; but let it suffice to say just now, that if my husband did
not understand the captain, nor the captain understand himself, yet I
understood them both very well; and, to tell the truth, it was a worse
shock than ever I had yet. Invention supplied me, indeed, with a sudden
motion to avoid showing my surprise; for as my spouse and I was sitting
by a little table near the fire, I reached out my hand, as if I had
intended to take a spoon which lay on the other side, and threw one of
the candles off of the table; and then snatching it up, started up upon
my feet, and stooped to the lap of my gown and took it in my hand. "Oh!"
says I, "my gown's spoiled; the candle has greased it prodigiously."
This furnished me with an excuse to my spouse to break off the discourse
for the present, and call Amy down; and Amy not coming presently, I said
to him, "My dear, I must run upstairs and put it off, and let Amy clean
it a little." So my husband rose up too, and went into a closet where he
kept his papers and books, and fetched a book out, and sat down by
himself to read.

Glad I was that I had got away, and up I run to Amy, who, as it
happened, was alone. "Oh, Amy!" says I, "we are all utterly undone." And
with that I burst out a-crying, and could not speak a word for a great
while.

I cannot help saying that some very good reflections offered themselves
upon this head. It presently occurred, what a glorious testimony it is
to the justice of Providence, and to the concern Providence has in
guiding all the affairs of men (even the least as well as the greatest),
that the most secret crimes are, by the most unforeseen accidents,
brought to light and discovered.

Another reflection was, how just it is that sin and shame follow one
another so constantly at the heels; that they are not like attendants
only, but, like cause and consequence, necessarily connected one with
another; that the crime going before, the scandal is certain to follow;
and that 'tis not in the power of human nature to conceal the first, or
avoid the last.

"What shall I do, Amy?" said I, as soon as I could speak, "and what will
become of me?" And then I cried again so vehemently that I could say no
more a great while. Amy was frighted almost out of her wits, but knew
nothing what the matter was; but she begged to know, and persuaded me to
compose myself, and not cry so. "Why, madam, if my master should come up
now," says she, "he will see what a disorder you are in; he will know
you have been crying, and then he will want to know the cause of it."
With that I broke out again. "Oh, he knows it already, Amy," says I, "he
knows all! 'Tis all discovered, and we are undone!" Amy was
thunderstruck now indeed. "Nay," says Amy, "if that be true, we are
undone indeed; but that can never be; that's impossible, I'm sure."

"No, no," says I, "'tis far from impossible, for I tell you 'tis so."
And by this time, being a little recovered, I told her what discourse my
husband and the captain had had together, and what the captain had said.
This put Amy into such a hurry that she cried, she raved, she swore and
cursed like a mad thing; then she upbraided me that I would not let her
kill the girl when she would have done it, and that it was all my own
doing, and the like. Well, however, I was not for killing the girl yet.
I could not bear the thoughts of that neither.

We spent half-an-hour in these extravagances, and brought nothing out of
them neither; for indeed we could do nothing or say nothing that was to
the purpose; for if anything was to come out-of-the-way, there was no
hindering it, or help for it; so after thus giving a vent to myself by
crying, I began to reflect how I had left my spouse below, and what I
had pretended to come up for; so I changed my gown that I pretended the
candle fell upon, and put on another, and went down.

When I had been down a good while, and found my spouse did not fall into
the story again, as I expected, I took heart, and called for it. "My
dear," said I, "the fall of the candle put you out of your history,
won't you go on with it?" "What history?" says he. "Why," says I, "about
the captain." "Oh," says he, "I had done with it. I know no more than
that the captain told a broken piece of news that he had heard by
halves, and told more by halves than he heard it,--namely, of your being
with child, and that you could not go the voyage."

I perceived my husband entered not into the thing at all, but took it
for a story, which, being told two or three times over, was puzzled, and
come to nothing, and that all that was meant by it was what he knew, or
thought he knew already--viz., that I was with child, which he wished
might be true.

His ignorance was a cordial to my soul, and I cursed them in my thoughts
that should ever undeceive him; and as I saw him willing to have the
story end there, as not worth being farther mentioned, I closed it too,
and said I supposed the captain had it from his wife; she might have
found somebody else to make her remarks upon; and so it passed off with
my husband well enough, and I was still safe there, where I thought
myself in most danger. But I had two uneasinesses still; the first was
lest the captain and my spouse should meet again, and enter into farther
discourse about it; and the second was lest the busy impertinent girl
should come again, and when she came, how to prevent her seeing Amy,
which was an article as material as any of the rest; for seeing Amy
would have been as fatal to me as her knowing all the rest.

As to the first of these, I knew the captain could not stay in town
above a week, but that his ship being already full of goods, and fallen
down the river, he must soon follow, so I contrived to carry my husband
somewhere out of town for a few days, that they might be sure not to
meet.

My greatest concern was where we should go. At last I fixed upon North
Hall; not, I said, that I would drink the waters, but that I thought the
air was good, and might be for my advantage. He, who did everything upon
the foundation of obliging me, readily came into it, and the coach was
appointed to be ready the next morning; but as we were settling matters,
he put in an ugly word that thwarted all my design, and that was, that
he had rather I would stay till afternoon, for that he should speak to
the captain the next morning if he could, to give him some letters,
which he could do, and be back again about twelve o'clock.

I said, "Ay, by all means." But it was but a cheat on him, and my voice
and my heart differed; for I resolved, if possible, he should not come
near the captain, nor see him, whatever came of it.

In the evening, therefore, a little before we went to bed, I pretended
to have altered my mind, and that I would not go to North Hall, but I
had a mind to go another way, but I told him I was afraid his business
would not permit him. He wanted to know where it was. I told him,
smiling, I would not tell him, lest it should oblige him to hinder his
business. He answered with the same temper, but with infinitely more
sincerity, that he had no business of so much consequence as to hinder
him going with me anywhere that I had a mind to go. "Yes," says I, "you
want to speak with the captain before he goes away." "Why, that's true,"
says he, "so I do," and paused awhile; and then added, "but I'll write a
note to a man that does business for me to go to him; 'tis only to get
some bills of loading signed, and he can do it." When I saw I had gained
my point, I seemed to hang back a little. "My dear," says I, "don't
hinder an hour's business for me; I can put it off for a week or two
rather than you shall do yourself any prejudice." "No, no," says he,
"you shall not put it off an hour for me, for I can do my business by
proxy with anybody but my wife." And then he took me in his arms and
kissed me. How did my blood flush up into my face when I reflected how
sincerely, how affectionately, this good-humoured gentleman embraced the
most cursed piece of hypocrisy that ever came into the arms of an honest
man! His was all tenderness, all kindness, and the utmost sincerity;
mine all grimace and deceit;--a piece of mere manage and framed conduct
to conceal a past life of wickedness, and prevent his discovering that
he had in his arms a she-devil, whose whole conversation for twenty-five
years had been black as hell, a complication of crime, and for which,
had he been let into it, he must have abhorred me and the very mention
of my name. But there was no help for me in it; all I had to satisfy
myself was that it was my business to be what I was, and conceal what I
had been; that all the satisfaction I could make him was to live
virtuously for the time to come, not being able to retrieve what had
been in time past; and this I resolved upon, though, had the great
temptation offered, as it did afterwards, I had reason to question my
stability. But of that hereafter.

After my husband had kindly thus given up his measures to mine, we
resolved to set out in the morning early. I told him that my project, if
he liked it, was to go to Tunbridge, and he, being entirely passive in
the thing, agreed to it with the greatest willingness; but said if I had
not named Tunbridge, he would have named Newmarket, there being a great
court there, and abundance of fine things to be seen. I offered him
another piece of hypocrisy here, for I pretended to be willing to go
thither, as the place of his choice, but indeed I would not have gone
for a thousand pounds; for the court being there at that time, I durst
not run the hazard of being known at a place where there were so many
eyes that had seen me before. So that, after some time, I told my
husband that I thought Newmarket was so full of people at that time,
that we should get no accommodation; that seeing the court and the crowd
was no entertainment at all to me, unless as it might be so to him, that
if he thought fit, we would rather put it off to another time; and that
if, when we went to Holland, we should go by Harwich, we might take a
round by Newmarket and Bury, and so come down to Ipswich, and go from
thence to the seaside. He was easily put off from this, as he was from
anything else that I did not approve; and so, with all imaginable
facility, he appointed to be ready early in the morning to go with me
for Tunbridge.

I had a double design in this, viz., first, to get away my spouse from
seeing the captain any more; and secondly, to be out of the way myself,
in case this impertinent girl, who was now my plague, should offer to
come again, as my friend the Quaker believed she would, and as indeed
happened within two or three days afterwards.

Having thus secured my going away the next day, I had nothing to do but
to furnish my faithful agent the Quaker with some instructions what to
say to this tormentor (for such she proved afterwards), and how to
manage her, if she made any more visits than ordinary.

I had a great mind to leave Amy behind too, as an assistant, because she
understood so perfectly well what to advise upon any emergence; and Amy
importuned me to do so. But I know not what secret impulse prevailed
over my thoughts against it; I could not do it for fear the wicked jade
should make her away, which my very soul abhorred the thoughts of;
which, however, Amy found means to bring to pass afterwards, as I may in
time relate more particularly.

It is true I wanted as much to be delivered from her as ever a sick man
did from a third-day ague; and had she dropped into the grave by any
fair way, as I may call it, I mean, had she died by any ordinary
distemper, I should have shed but very few tears for her. But I was not
arrived to such a pitch of obstinate wickedness as to commit murder,
especially such as to murder my own child, or so much as to harbour a
thought so barbarous in my mind. But, as I said, Amy effected all
afterwards without my knowledge, for which I gave her my hearty curse,
though I could do little more; for to have fallen upon Amy had been to
have murdered myself. But this tragedy requires a longer story than I
have room for here. I return to my journey.

My dear friend the Quaker was kind, and yet honest, and would do
anything that was just and upright to serve me, but nothing wicked or
dishonourable. That she might be able to say boldly to the creature, if
she came, she did not know where I was gone, she desired I would not let
her know; and to make her ignorance the more absolutely safe to herself,
and likewise to me, I allowed her to say that she heard us talk of going
to Newmarket, &c. She liked that part, and I left all the rest to her,
to act as she thought fit; only charged her, that if the girl entered
into the story of the Pall Mall, she should not entertain much talk
about it, but let her understand that we all thought she spoke of it a
little too particularly; and that the lady (meaning me) took it a
little ill to be so likened to a public mistress, or a stage-player, and
the like; and so to bring her, if possible, to say no more of it.
However, though I did not tell my friend the Quaker how to write to me,
or where I was, yet I left a sealed paper with her maid to give her, in
which I gave her a direction how to write to Amy, and so, in effect, to
myself.

It was but a few days after I was gone, but the impatient girl came to
my lodgings on pretence to see how I did, and to hear if I intended to
go the voyage, and the like. My trusty agent was at home, and received
her coldly at the door; but told her that the lady, which she supposed
she meant, was gone from her house.

This was a full stop to all she could say for a good while; but as she
stood musing some time at the door, considering what to begin a talk
upon, she perceived my friend the Quaker looked a little uneasy, as if
she wanted to go in and shut the door, which stung her to the quick; and
the wary Quaker had not so much as asked her to come in; for seeing her
alone she expected she would be very impertinent, and concluded that I
did not care how coldly she received her.

But she was not to be put off so. She said if the Lady ---- was not to
be spoken with, she desired to speak two or three words with her,
meaning my friend the Quaker. Upon that the Quaker civilly but coldly
asked her to walk in, which was what she wanted. Note.--She did not
carry her into her best parlour, as formerly, but into a little outer
room, where the servants usually waited.

By the first of her discourse she did not stick to insinuate as if she
believed I was in the house, but was unwilling to be seen; and pressed
earnestly that she might speak but two words with me; to which she added
earnest entreaties, and at last tears.

"I am sorry," says my good creature the Quaker, "thou hast so ill an
opinion of me as to think I would tell thee an untruth, and say that the
Lady ---- was gone from my house if she was not! I assure thee I do not
use any such method; nor does the Lady ---- desire any such kind of
service from me, as I know of. If she had been in the house, I should
have told thee so."

She said little to that, but said it was business of the utmost
importance that she desired to speak with me about, and then cried again
very much.

"Thou seem'st to be sorely afflicted," says the Quaker, "I wish I could
give thee any relief; but if nothing will comfort thee but seeing the
Lady ----, it is not in my power."

"I hope it is," says she again; "to be sure it is of great consequence
to me, so much that I am undone without it."

"Thou troublest me very much to hear thee say so," says the Quaker; "but
why, then, didst thou not speak to her apart when thou wast here
before?"

"I had no opportunity," says she, "to speak to her alone, and I could
not do it in company; if I could have spoken but two words to her alone,
I would have thrown myself at her foot, and asked her blessing."

"I am surprised at thee; I do not understand thee," says the Quaker.

"Oh!" says she, "stand my friend if you have any charity, or if you have
any compassion for the miserable; for I am utterly undone!"

"Thou terrifiest me," says the Quaker, "with such passionate
expressions, for verily I cannot comprehend thee!"

"Oh!" says she, "she is my mother! she is my mother! and she does not
own me!"

"Thy mother!" says the Quaker, and began to be greatly moved indeed. "I
am astonished at thee: what dost thou mean?"

"I mean nothing but what I say," says she. "I say again, she is my
mother, and will not own me;" and with that she stopped with a flood of
tears.

"Not own thee!" says the Quaker; and the tender good creature wept too.
"Why," says she, "she does not know thee, and never saw thee before."

"No," says the girl, "I believe she does not know me, but I know her;
and I know that she is my mother."

"It's impossible, thou talk'st mystery!" says the Quaker; "wilt thou
explain thyself a little to me?"

"Yes, yes," says she, "I can explain it well enough. I am sure she is my
mother, and I have broke my heart to search for her; and now to lose her
again, when I was so sure I had found her, will break my heart more
effectually."

"Well, but if she be thy mother," says the Quaker, "how can it be that
she should not know thee?"

"Alas!" says she, "I have been lost to her ever since I was a child; she
has never seen me."

"And hast thou never seen her?" says the Quaker.

"Yes," says she, "I have seen her; often enough I saw her; for when she
was the Lady Roxana I was her housemaid, being a servant, but I did not
know her then, nor she me; but it has all come out since. Has she not a
maid named Amy?" Note.--The honest Quaker was--nonplussed, and greatly
surprised at that question.

"Truly," says she, "the Lady ---- has several women servants, but I do
not know all their names."

"But her woman, her favourite," adds the girl; "is not her name Amy?"

"Why, truly," says the Quaker, with a very happy turn of wit, "I do not
like to be examined; but lest thou shouldest take up any mistakes by
reason of my backwardness to speak, I will answer thee for once, that
what her woman's name is I know not, but they call her Cherry."

_N.B._--My husband gave her that name in jest on our wedding-day, and we
had called her by it ever after; so that she spoke literally true at
that time.

The girl replied very modestly that she was sorry if she gave her any
offence in asking; that she did not design to be rude to her, or pretend
to examine her; but that she was in such an agony at this disaster that
she knew not what she did or said; and that she should be very sorry to
disoblige her, but begged of her again, as she was a Christian and a
woman, and had been a mother of children, that she would take pity on
her, and, if possible, assist her, so that she might but come to me and
speak a few words to me.

The tender-hearted Quaker told me the girl spoke this with such moving
eloquence that it forced tears from her; but she was obliged to say that
she neither knew where I was gone or how to write to me; but that if she
did ever see me again she would not fail to give me an account of all
she had said to her, or that she should yet think fit to say, and to
take my answer to it, if I thought fit to give any.

Then the Quaker took the freedom to ask a few particulars about this
wonderful story, as she called it; at which the girl, beginning at the
first distresses of my life, and indeed of her own, went through all the
history of her miserable education, her service under the Lady Roxana,
as she called me, and her relief by Mrs. Amy, with the reasons she had
to believe that as Amy owned herself to be the same that lived with her
mother, and especially that Amy was the Lady Roxana's maid too, and came
out of France with her, she was by those circumstances, and several
others in her conversation, as fully convinced that the Lady Roxana was
her mother, as she was that the Lady ---- at her house (the Quaker's)
was the very same Roxana that she had been servant to.

My good friend the Quaker, though terribly shocked at the story, and not
well knowing what to say, yet was too much my friend to seem convinced
in a thing which she did not know to be true, and which, if it was true,
she could see plainly I had a mind should not be known; so she turned
her discourse to argue the girl out of it. She insisted upon the slender
evidence she had of the fact itself, and the rudeness of claiming so
near a relation of one so much above her, and of whose concern in it she
had no knowledge, at least no sufficient proof; that as the lady at her
house was a person above any disguises, so she could not believe that
she would deny her being her daughter, if she was really her mother;
that she was able sufficiently to have provided for her if she had not a
mind to have her known; and, therefore, seeing she had heard all she had
said of the Lady Roxana, and was so far from owning herself to be the
person, so she had censured that sham lady as a cheat and a common
woman; and that 'twas certain she could never be brought to own a name
and character she had so justly exposed.

Besides, she told her that her lodger, meaning me, was not a sham lady,
but the real wife of a knight-baronet; and that she knew her to be
honestly such, and far above such a person as she had described. She
then added that she had another reason why it was not very possible to
be true. "And that is," says she, "thy age is in the way; for thou
acknowledgest that thou art four-and twenty years old, and that thou
wast the youngest of three of thy mother's children; so that, by thy
account, thy mother must be extremely young, or this lady cannot be thy
mother; for thou seest," says she, "and any one may see, she is but a
young woman now, and cannot be supposed to be above forty years old, if
she is so much; and is now big with child at her going into the country;
so that I cannot give any credit to thy notion of her being thy mother;
and if I might counsel thee, it should be to give over that thought, as
an improbable story that does but serve to disorder thee, and disturb
thy head; for," added she, "I perceive thou art much disturbed indeed."

But this was all nothing; she could be satisfied with nothing but seeing
me; but the Quaker defended herself very well, and insisted on it that
she could not give her any account of me; and finding her still
importunate, she affected at last being a little disgusted that she
should not believe her, and added, that indeed, if she had known where I
was gone, she would not have given any one an account of it, unless I
had given her orders to do so. "But seeing she has not acquainted me,"
says she, "where she has gone, 'tis an intimation to me she was not
desirous it should be publicly known;" and with this she rose up, which
was as plain a desiring her to rise up too and begone as could be
expressed, except the downright showing her the door.

Well, the girl rejected all this, and told her she could not indeed
expect that she (the Quaker) should be affected with the story she had
told her, however moving, or that she should take any pity on her. That
it was her misfortune, that when she was at the house before, and in the
room with me, she did not beg to speak a word with me in private, or
throw herself upon the floor at my feet, and claim what the affection of
a mother would have done for her; but since she had slipped her
opportunity, she would wait for another; that she found by her (the
Quaker's) talk, that she had not quite left her lodgings, but was gone
into the country, she supposed for the air; and she was resolved she
would take so much knight-errantry upon her, that she would visit all
the airing-places in the nation, and even all the kingdom over, ay, and
Holland too, but she would find me; for she was satisfied she could so
convince me that she was my own child, that I would not deny it; and she
was sure I was so tender and compassionate, I would not let her perish
after I was convinced that she was my own flesh and blood; and in saying
she would visit all the airing-places in England, she reckoned them all
up by name, and began with Tunbridge, the very place I was gone to; then
reckoning up Epsom, North Hall, Barnet, Newmarket, Bury, and at last,
the Bath; and with this she took her leave.

My faithful agent the Quaker failed not to write to me immediately; but
as she was a cunning as well as an honest woman, it presently occurred
to her that this was a story which, whether true or false, was not very
fit to come to my husband's knowledge; that as she did not know what I
might have been, or might have been called in former times, and how far
there might have been something or nothing in it, so she thought if it
was a secret I ought to have the telling it myself; and if it was not,
it might as well be public afterwards as now; and that, at least, she
ought to leave it where she found it, and not hand it forwards to
anybody without my consent. These prudent measures were inexpressibly
kind, as well as seasonable; for it had been likely enough that her
letter might have come publicly to me, and though my husband would not
have opened it, yet it would have looked a little odd that I should
conceal its contents from him, when I had pretended so much to
communicate all my affairs.

In consequence of this wise caution, my good friend only wrote me in few
words, that the impertinent young woman had been with her, as she
expected she would; and that she thought it would be very convenient
that, if I could spare Cherry, I would send her up (meaning Amy),
because she found there might be some occasion for her.

As it happened, this letter was enclosed to Amy herself, and not sent
by the way I had at first ordered; but it came safe to my hands; and
though I was alarmed a little at it, yet I was not acquainted with the
danger I was in of an immediate visit from this teasing creature till
afterwards; and I ran a greater risk, indeed, than ordinary, in that I
did not send Amy up under thirteen or fourteen days, believing myself as
much concealed at Tunbridge as if I had been at Vienna.

But the concern of my faithful spy (for such my Quaker was now, upon the
mere foot of her own sagacity), I say, her concern for me, was my safety
in this exigence, when I was, as it were, keeping no guard for myself;
for, finding Amy not come up, and that she did not know how soon this
wild thing might put her designed ramble in practice, she sent a
messenger to the captain's wife's house, where she lodged, to tell her
that she wanted to speak with her. She was at the heels of the
messenger, and came eager for some news; and hoped, she said, the lady
(meaning me) had been come to town.

The Quaker, with as much caution as she was mistress of, not to tell a
downright lie, made her believe she expected to hear of me very quickly;
and frequently, by the by, speaking of being abroad to take the air,
talked of the country about Bury, how pleasant it was, how wholesome,
and how fine an air; how the downs about Newmarket were exceeding fine,
and what a vast deal of company there was, now the court was there; till
at last, the girl began to conclude that my ladyship was gone thither;
for, she said, she knew I loved to see a great deal of company.

"Nay," says my friend, "thou takest me wrong; I did not suggest," says
she, "that the person thou inquirest after is gone thither, neither do I
believe she is, I assure thee." Well, the girl smiled, and let her know
that she believed it for all that; so, to clench it fast, "Verily," says
she, with great seriousness, "thou dost not do well, for thou suspectest
everything and believest nothing. I speak solemnly to thee that I do not
believe they are gone that way; so if thou givest thyself the trouble to
go that way, and art disappointed, do not say that I have deceived
thee." She knew well enough that if this did abate her suspicion it
would not remove it, and that it would do little more than amuse her;
but by this she kept her in suspense till Amy came up, and that was
enough.

When Amy came up, she was quite confounded to hear the relation which
the Quaker gave her, and found means to acquaint me of it; only letting
me know, to my great satisfaction, that she would not come to Tunbridge
first, but that she would certainly go to Newmarket or Bury first.

However, it gave me very great uneasiness; for as she resolved to ramble
in search after me over the whole country, I was safe nowhere, no, not
in Holland itself. So indeed I did not know what to do with her; and
thus I had a bitter in all my sweet, for I was continually perplexed
with this hussy, and thought she haunted me like an evil spirit.

In the meantime Amy was next door to stark-mad about her; she durst not
see her at my lodgings for her life; and she went days without number to
Spitalfields, where she used to come, and to her former lodging, and
could never meet with her. At length she took up a mad resolution that
she would go directly to the captain's house in Redriff and speak with
her. It was a mad step, that's true; but as Amy said she was mad, so
nothing she could do could be otherwise. For if Amy had found her at
Redriff, she (the girl) would have concluded presently that the Quaker
had given her notice, and so that we were all of a knot; and that, in
short, all she had said was right. But as it happened, things came to
hit better than we expected; for that Amy going out of a coach to take
water at Tower Wharf, meets the girl just come on shore, having crossed
the water from Redriff. Amy made as if she would have passed by her,
though they met so full that she did not pretend she did not see her,
for she looked fairly upon her first, but then turning her head away
with a slight, offered to go from her; but the girl stopped, and spoke
first, and made some manners to her.

Amy spoke coldly to her, and a little angry; and after some words,
standing in the street or passage, the girl saying she seemed to be
angry, and would not have spoken to her, "Why," says Amy, "how can you
expect I should have any more to say to you after I had done so much
for you, and you have behaved so to me?" The girl seemed to take no
notice of that now, but answered, "I was going to wait on you now."
"Wait on me!" says Amy; "what do you mean by that?" "Why," says she
again, with a kind of familiarity, "I was going to your lodgings."

Amy was provoked to the last degree at her, and yet she thought it was
not her time to resent, because she had a more fatal and wicked design
in her head against her; which, indeed, I never knew till after it was
executed, nor durst Amy ever communicate it to me; for as I had always
expressed myself vehemently against hurting a hair of her head, so she
was resolved to take her own measures without consulting me any more.

In order to this, Amy gave her good words, and concealed her resentment
as much as she could; and when she talked of going to her lodging, Amy
smiled and said nothing, but called for a pair of oars to go to
Greenwich; and asked her, seeing she said she was going to her lodging,
to go along with her, for she was going home, and was all alone.

Amy did this with such a stock of assurance that the girl was
confounded, and knew not what to say; but the more she hesitated, the
more Amy pressed her to go; and talking very kindly to her, told her if
she did not go to see her lodgings she might go to keep her company, and
she would pay a boat to bring her back again; so, in a word, Amy
prevailed on her to go into the boat with her, and carried her down to
Greenwich.

'Tis certain that Amy had no more business at Greenwich than I had, nor
was she going thither; but we were all hampered to the last degree with
the impertinence of this creature; and, in particular, I was horribly
perplexed with it.

As they were in the boat, Amy began to reproach her with ingratitude in
treating her so rudely who had done so much for her, and been so kind to
her; and to ask her what she had got by it, or what she expected to get.
Then came in my share, the Lady Roxana. Amy jested with that, and
bantered her a little, and asked her if she had found her yet.

But Amy was both surprised and enraged when the girl told her roundly
that she thanked her for what she had done for her, but that she would
not have her think she was so ignorant as not to know that what she
(Amy) had done was by her mother's order, and who she was beholden to
for it. That she could never make instruments pass for principals, and
pay the debt to the agent when the obligation was all to the original.
That she knew well enough who she was, and who she was employed by. That
she knew the Lady ---- very well (naming the name that I now went by),
which was my husband's true name, and by which she might know whether
she had found out her mother or no.

Amy wished her at the bottom of the Thames; and had there been no
watermen in the boat, and nobody in sight, she swore to me she would
have thrown her into the river. I was horribly disturbed when she told
me this story, and began to think this would, at last, all end in my
ruin; but when Amy spoke of throwing her into the river and drowning
her, I was so provoked at her that all my rage turned against Amy, and I
fell thoroughly out with her. I had now kept Amy almost thirty years,
and found her on all occasions the faithfullest creature to me that ever
woman had--I say, faithful to me; for, however wicked she was, still she
was true to me; and even this rage of hers was all upon my account, and
for fear any mischief should befall me.

But be that how it would, I could not bear the mention of her murdering
the poor girl, and it put me so beside myself, that I rose up in a rage,
and bade her get out of my sight, and out of my house; told her I had
kept her too long, and that I would never see her face more. I had
before told her that she was a murderer, and a bloody-minded creature;
that she could not but know that I could not bear the thought of it,
much less the mention of it; and that it was the impudentest thing that
ever was known to make such a proposal to me, when she knew that I was
really the mother of this girl, and that she was my own child; that it
was wicked enough in her, but that she must conclude I was ten times
wickeder than herself if I could come into it; that the girl was in the
right, and I had nothing to blame her for; but that it was owing to the
wickedness of my life that made it necessary for me to keep her from a
discovery; but that I would not murder my child, though I was otherwise
to be ruined by it. Amy replied, somewhat rough and short, Would I not?
but she would, she said, if she had an opportunity; and upon these words
it was that I bade her get out of my sight and out of my house; and it
went so far that Amy packed up her alls, and marched off; and was gone
for almost good and all. But of that in its order; I must go back to her
relation of the voyage which they made to Greenwich together.

They held on the wrangle all the way by water; the girl insisted upon
her knowing that I was her mother, and told her all the history of my
life in the Pall Mall, as well after her being turned away as before,
and of my marriage since; and which was worse, not only who my present
husband was, but where he had lived, viz., at Rouen in France. She knew
nothing of Paris or of where we was going to live, namely, at Nimeguen;
but told her in so many words that if she could not find me here, she
would go to Holland after me.

They landed at Greenwich, and Amy carried her into the park with her,
and they walked above two hours there in the farthest and remotest
walks; which Amy did because, as they talked with great heat, it was
apparent they were quarrelling, and the people took notice of it.

They walked till they came almost to the wilderness at the south side
of the park; but the girl, perceiving Amy offered to go in there among
the woods and trees, stopped short there, and would go no further; but
said she would not go in there.

Amy smiled, and asked her what was the matter? She replied short, she
did not know where she was, nor where she was going to carry her, and
she would go no farther; and without any more ceremony, turns back, and
walks apace away from her. Amy owned she was surprised, and came back
too, and called to her, upon which the girl stopped, and Amy coming up
to her, asked her what she meant?

The girl boldly replied she did not know but she might murder her; and
that, in short, she would not trust herself with her, and never would
come into her company again alone.

It was very provoking, but, however, Amy kept her temper with much
difficulty, and bore it, knowing that much might depend upon it; so she
mocked her foolish jealousy, and told her she need not be uneasy for
her, she would do her no harm, and would have done her good if she would
have let her; but since she was of such a refractory humour, she should
not trouble herself, for she should never come into her company again;
and that neither she or her brother or sister should ever hear from her
or see her any more; and so she should have the satisfaction of being
the ruin of her brother and sisters as well as of herself.

The girl seemed a little mollified at that, and said that for herself,
she knew the worst of it, she could seek her fortune; but it was hard
her brother and sister should suffer on her score; and said something
that was tender and well enough on that account. But Amy told her it was
for her to take that into consideration; for she would let her see that
it was all her own; that she would have done them all good, but that
having been used thus, she would do no more for any of them; and that
she should not need to be afraid to come into her company again, for she
would never give her occasion for it any more. This, by the way, was
false in the girl too; for she did venture into Amy's company again
after that, once too much, as I shall relate by itself.

They grew cooler, however, afterwards, and Amy carried her into a house
at Greenwich, where she was acquainted, and took an occasion to leave
the girl in a room awhile, to speak to the people in the house, and so
prepare them to own her as a lodger in the house; and then going in to
her again told her there she lodged, if she had a mind to find her out,
or if anybody else had anything to say to her. And so Amy dismissed her,
and got rid of her again; and finding an empty hackney-coach in the
town, came away by land to London, and the girl, going down to the
water-side, came by boat.

This conversation did not answer Amy's end at all, because it did not
secure the girl from pursuing her design of hunting me out; and though
my indefatigable friend the Quaker amused her three or four days, yet I
had such notice of it at last that I thought fit to come away from
Tunbridge upon it. And where to go I knew not; but, in short, I went to
a little village upon Epping Forest, called Woodford, and took lodgings
in a private house, where I lived retired about six weeks, till I
thought she might be tired of her search, and have given me over.

Here I received an account from my trusty Quaker that the wench had
really been at Tunbridge, had found out my lodgings, and had told her
tale there in a most dismal tone; that she had followed us, as she
thought, to London; but the Quaker had answered her that she knew
nothing of it, which was indeed true; and had admonished her to be easy,
and not hunt after people of such fashion as we were, as if we were
thieves; that she might be assured, that since I was not willing to see
her, I would not be forced to it; and treating me thus would effectually
disoblige me. And with such discourses as these she quieted her; and she
(the Quaker) added that she hoped I should not be troubled much more
with her.

It was in this time that Amy gave me the history of her Greenwich
voyage, when she spoke of drowning and killing the girl in so serious a
manner, and with such an apparent resolution of doing it, that, as I
said, put me in a rage with her, so that I effectually turned her away
from me, as I have said above, and she was gone; nor did she so much as
tell me whither or which way she was gone. On the other hand, when I
came to reflect on it that now I had neither assistant or confidant to
speak to, or receive the least information from, my friend the Quaker
excepted, it made me very uneasy.

I waited and expected and wondered from day to day, still thinking Amy
would one time or other think a little and come again, or at least let
me hear of her; but for ten days together I heard nothing of her. I was
so impatient that I got neither rest by day or sleep by night, and what
to do I knew not. I durst not go to town to the Quaker's for fear of
meeting that vexatious creature, my girl, and I could get no
intelligence where I was; so I got my spouse, upon pretence of wanting
her company, to take the coach one day and fetch my good Quaker to me.

When I had her, I durst ask her no questions, nor hardly knew which end
of the business to begin to talk of; but of her own accord she told me
that the girl had been three or four times haunting her for news from
me; and that she had been so troublesome that she had been obliged to
show herself a little angry with her; and at last told her plainly that
she need give herself no trouble in searching after me by her means, for
she (the Quaker) would not tell her if she knew; upon which she
refrained awhile. But, on the other hand, she told me it was not safe
for me to send my own coach for her to come in, for she had some reason
to believe that she (my daughter) watched her door night and day; nay,
and watched her too every time she went in and out; for she was so bent
upon a discovery that she spared no pains, and she believed she had
taken a lodging very near their house for that purpose.

I could hardly give her a hearing of all this for my eagerness to ask
for Amy; but I was confounded when she told me she had heard nothing of
her. It is impossible to express the anxious thoughts that rolled about
in my mind, and continually perplexed me about her; particularly I
reproached myself with my rashness in turning away so faithful a
creature that for so many years had not only been a servant but an
agent; and not only an agent, but a friend, and a faithful friend too.

Then I considered too that Amy knew all the secret history of my life;
had been in all the intrigues of it, and been a party in both evil and
good; and at best there was no policy in it; that as it was very
ungenerous and unkind to run things to such an extremity with her, and
for an occasion, too, in which all the fault she was guilty of was owing
to her excessive care for my safety, so it must be only her steady
kindness to me, and an excess of generous friendship for me, that should
keep her from ill-using me in return for it; which ill-using me was
enough in her power, and might be my utter undoing.

These thoughts perplexed me exceedingly, and what course to take I
really did not know. I began, indeed, to give Amy quite over, for she
had now been gone above a fortnight, and as she had taken away all her
clothes, and her money too, which was not a little, and so had no
occasion of that kind to come any more, so she had not left any word
where she was gone, or to which part of the world I might send to hear
of her.

And I was troubled on another account too, viz., that my spouse and I
too had resolved to do very handsomely for Amy, without considering what
she might have got another way at all; but we had said nothing of it to
her, and so I thought, as she had not known what was likely to fall in
her way, she had not the influence of that expectation to make her come
back.

Upon the whole, the perplexity of this girl, who hunted me as if, like a
hound, she had had a hot scent, but was now at a fault, I say, that
perplexity, and this other part of Amy being gone, issued in this--I
resolved to be gone, and go over to Holland; there, I believed, I should
be at rest. So I took occasion one day to tell my spouse that I was
afraid he might take it ill that I had amused him thus long, and that at
last I doubted I was not with child; and that since it was so, our
things being packed up, and all in order for going to Holland, I would
go away now when he pleased.

My spouse, who was perfectly easy whether in going or staying, left it
all entirely to me; so I considered of it, and began to prepare again
for my voyage. But, alas! I was irresolute to the last degree. I was,
for want of Amy, destitute; I had lost my right hand; she was my
steward, gathered in my rents (I mean my interest money) and kept my
accounts, and, in a word, did all my business; and without her, indeed,
I knew not how to go away nor how to stay. But an accident thrust itself
in here, and that even in Amy's conduct too, which frighted me away, and
without her too, in the utmost horror and confusion.

I have related how my faithful friend the Quaker was come to me, and
what account she gave me of her being continually haunted by my
daughter; and that, as she said, she watched her very door night and
day. The truth was, she had set a spy to watch so effectually that she
(the Quaker) neither went in or out but she had notice of it.

This was too evident when, the next morning after she came to me (for I
kept her all night), to my unspeakable surprise I saw a hackney-coach
stop at the door where I lodged, and saw her (my daughter) in the coach
all alone. It was a very good chance, in the middle of a bad one, that
my husband had taken out the coach that very morning, and was gone to
London. As for me, I had neither life or soul left in me; I was so
confounded I knew not what to do or to say.

My happy visitor had more presence of mind than I, and asked me if I had
made no acquaintance among the neighbours. I told her, yes, there was a
lady lodged two doors off that I was very intimate with. "But hast thou
no way out backward to go to her?" says she. Now it happened there was
a back-door in the garden, by which we usually went and came to and from
the house, so I told her of it. "Well, well," says she, "go out and make
a visit then, and leave the rest to me." Away I run, told the lady (for
I was very free there) that I was a widow to-day, my spouse being gone
to London, so I came not to visit her, but to dwell with her that day,
because also our landlady had got strangers come from London. So having
framed this orderly lie, I pulled some work out of my pocket, and added
I did not come to be idle.

As I went out one way, my friend the Quaker went the other to receive
this unwelcome guest. The girl made but little ceremony, but having bid
the coachman ring at the gate, gets down out of the coach and comes to
the door, a country girl going to the door (belonging to the house), for
the Quaker forbid any of my maids going. Madam asked for my Quaker by
name, and the girl asked her to walk in.

Upon this, my Quaker, seeing there was no hanging back, goes to her
immediately, but put all the gravity upon her countenance that she was
mistress of, and that was not a little indeed.

When she (the Quaker) came into the room (for they had showed my
daughter into a little parlour), she kept her grave countenance, but
said not a word, nor did my daughter speak a good while; but after some
time my girl began and said, "I suppose you know me, madam?"

"Yes," says the Quaker, "I know thee." And so the dialogue went on.

_Girl._ Then you know my business too?

_Quaker._ No, verily, I do not know any business thou canst have here
with me.

_Girl._ Indeed, my business is not chiefly with you.

_Qu._ Why, then, dost thou come after me thus far?

_Girl._ You know whom I seek. [_And with that she cried._]

_Qu._ But why shouldst thou follow me for her, since thou know'st that I
assured thee more than once that I knew not where she was?

_Girl._ But I hoped you could.

_Qu._ Then thou must hope that I did not speak the truth, which would be
very wicked.

_Girl._ I doubt not but she is in this house.

_Qu._ If those be thy thoughts, thou may'st inquire in the house; so
thou hast no more business with me. Farewell! [_Offers to go._]

_Girl._ I would not be uncivil; I beg you to let me see her.

_Qu._ I am here to visit some of my friends, and I think thou art not
very civil in following me hither.

_Girl._ I came in hopes of a discovery in my great affair which you know
of.

_Qu._ Thou cam'st wildly, indeed; I counsel thee to go back again, and
be easy; I shall keep my word with thee, that I would not meddle in it,
or give thee any account, if I knew it, unless I had her orders.

[Illustration: ROXANA'S DAUGHTER AND THE QUAKER

_Here the girl importuned her again with the utmost earnestness, and
cried bitterly_]

_Girl._ If you knew my distress you could not be so cruel.

_Qu._ Thou hast told me all thy story, and I think it might be more
cruelty to tell thee than not to tell thee; for I understand she is
resolved not to see thee, and declares she is not thy mother. Will'st
thou be owned where thou hast no relation?

_Girl._ Oh, if I could but speak to her, I would prove my relation to
her so that she could not deny it any longer.

_Qu._ Well, but thou canst not come to speak with her, it seems.

_Girl._ I hope you will tell me if she is here. I had a good account
that you were come out to see her, and that she sent for you.

_Qu._ I much wonder how thou couldst have such an account. If I had come
out to see her, thou hast happened to miss the house, for I assure thee
she is not to be found in this house.

Here the girl importuned her again with the utmost earnestness, and
cried bitterly, insomuch that my poor Quaker was softened with it, and
began to persuade me to consider of it, and, if it might consist with my
affairs, to see her, and hear what she had to say; but this was
afterwards. I return to the discourse.

The Quaker was perplexed with her a long time; she talked of sending
back the coach, and lying in the town all night. This, my friend knew,
would be very uneasy to me, but she durst not speak a word against it;
but on a sudden thought, she offered a bold stroke, which, though
dangerous if it had happened wrong, had its desired effect.

She told her that, as for dismissing her coach, that was as she pleased,
she believed she would not easily get a lodging in the town; but that as
she was in a strange place, she would so much befriend her, that she
would speak to the people of the house, that if they had room, she might
have a lodging there for one night, rather than be forced back to London
before she was free to go.

This was a cunning, though a dangerous step, and it succeeded
accordingly, for it amused the creature entirely, and she presently
concluded that really I could not be there then, otherwise she would
never have asked her to lie in the house; so she grew cold again
presently as to her lodging there, and said, No, since it was so, she
would go back that afternoon, but she would come again in two or three
days, and search that and all the towns round in an effectual manner, if
she stayed a week or two to do it; for, in short, if I was in England or
Holland she would find me.

"In truth," says the Quaker, "thou wilt make me very hurtful to thee,
then." "Why so?" says she, "Because wherever I go, thou wilt put thyself
to great expense, and the country to a great deal of unnecessary
trouble." "Not unnecessary," says she. "Yes, truly," says the Quaker;
"it must be unnecessary, because it will be to no purpose. I think I
must abide in my own house to save thee that charge and trouble."

She said little to that, except that, she said, she would give her as
little trouble as possible; but she was afraid she should sometimes be
uneasy to her, which she hoped she would excuse. My Quaker told her she
would much rather excuse her if she would forbear; for that if she would
believe her, she would assure her she should never get any intelligence
of me by her.

That set her into tears again; but after a while, recovering herself,
she told her perhaps she might be mistaken; and she (the Quaker) should
watch herself very narrowly, or she might one time or other get some
intelligence from her, whether she would or no; and she was satisfied
she had gained some of her by this journey, for that if I was not in the
house, I was not far off; and if I did not remove very quickly, she
would find me out. "Very well," says my Quaker; "then if the lady is not
willing to see thee, thou givest me notice to tell her, that she may get
out of thy way."

She flew out in a rage at that, and told my friend that if she did, a
curse would follow her, and her children after her, and denounced such
horrid things upon her as frighted the poor tender-hearted Quaker
strangely, and put her more out of temper than ever I saw her before; so
that she resolved to go home the next morning, and I, that was ten times
more uneasy than she, resolved to follow her, and go to London too;
which, however, upon second thoughts, I did not, but took effectual
measures not to be seen or owned if she came any more; but I heard no
more of her for some time.

I stayed there about a fortnight, and in all that time I heard no more
of her, or of my Quaker about her; but after about two days more, I had
a letter from my Quaker, intimating that she had something of moment to
say, that she could not communicate by letter, but wished I would give
myself the trouble to come up, directing me to come with the coach into
Goodman's Fields, and then walk to her back-door on foot, which being
left open on purpose, the watchful lady, if she had any spies, could not
well see me.

My thoughts had for so long time been kept, as it were, waking, that
almost everything gave me the alarm, and this especially, so that I was
very uneasy; but I could not bring matters to bear to make my coming to
London so clear to my husband as I would have done; for he liked the
place, and had a mind, he said, to stay a little longer, if it was not
against my inclination; so I wrote my friend the Quaker word that I
could not come to town yet; and that, besides, I could not think of
being there under spies, and afraid to look out of doors; and so, in
short, I put off going for near a fortnight more.

At the end of that time she wrote again, in which she told me that she
had not lately seen the impertinent visitor which had been so
troublesome; but that she had seen my trusty agent Amy, who told her
she had cried for six weeks without intermission; that Amy had given her
an account how troublesome the creature had been, and to what straits
and perplexities I was driven by her hunting after and following me from
place to place; upon which Amy had said, that, notwithstanding I was
angry with her, and had used her so hardly for saying something about
her of the same kind, yet there was an absolute necessity of securing
her, and removing her out of the way; and that, in short, without asking
my leave, or anybody's leave, she should take care she should trouble
her mistress (meaning me) no more; and that after Amy had said so, she
had indeed never heard any more of the girl; so that she supposed Amy
had managed it so well as to put an end to it.

The innocent, well-meaning creature, my Quaker, who was all kindness and
goodness in herself, and particularly to me, saw nothing in this; but
she thought Amy had found some way to persuade her to be quiet and easy,
and to give over teasing and following me, and rejoiced in it for my
sake; as she thought nothing of any evil herself, so she suspected none
in anybody else, and was exceeding glad of having such good news to
write to me; but my thoughts of it run otherwise.

I was struck, as with a blast from heaven, at the reading her letter; I
fell into a fit of trembling from head to foot, and I ran raving about
the room like a mad woman. I had nobody to speak a word to, to give
vent to my passion; nor did I speak a word for a good while, till after
it had almost overcome me. I threw myself on the bed, and cried out,
"Lord, be merciful to me, she has murdered my child!" and with that a
flood of tears burst out, and I cried vehemently for above an hour.

My husband was very happily gone out a-hunting, so that I had the
opportunity of being alone, and to give my passions some vent, by which
I a little recovered myself. But after my crying was over, then I fell
in a new rage at Amy; I called her a thousand devils and monsters and
hard-hearted tigers; I reproached her with her knowing that I abhorred
it, and had let her know it sufficiently, in that I had, at it were,
kicked her out of doors, after so many years' friendship and service,
only for naming it to me.

Well, after some time, my spouse came in from his sport, and I put on
the best looks I could to deceive him; but he did not take so little
notice of me as not to see I had been crying, and that something
troubled me, and he pressed me to tell him. I seemed to bring it out
with reluctance, but told him my backwardness was more because I was
ashamed that such a trifle should have any effect upon me, than for any
weight that was in it; so I told him I had been vexing myself about my
woman Amy's not coming again; that she might have known me better than
not to believe I should have been friends with her again, and the like;
and that, in short, I had lost the best servant by my rashness that ever
woman had.

"Well, well," says he, "if that be all your grief, I hope you will soon
shake it off; I'll warrant you in a little while we shall hear of Mrs.
Amy again." And so it went off for that time. But it did not go off with
me; for I was uneasy and terrified to the last degree, and wanted to get
some farther account of the thing. So I went away to my sure and certain
comforter, the Quaker, and there I had the whole story of it; and the
good innocent Quaker gave me joy of my being rid of such an unsufferable
tormentor.

"Rid of her! Ay," says I, "if I was rid of her fairly and honourably;
but I don't know what Amy may have done. Sure, she ha'n't made her
away?" "Oh fie!" says my Quaker; "how canst thou entertain such a
notion! No, no. Made her away? Amy didn't talk like that; I dare say
thou may'st be easy in that; Amy has nothing of that in her head, I dare
say," says she; and so threw it, as it were, out of my thoughts.

But it would not do; it run in my head continually; night and day I
could think of nothing else; and it fixed such a horror of the fact upon
my spirits, and such a detestation of Amy, who I looked upon as the
murderer, that, as for her, I believe if I could have seen her I should
certainly have sent her to Newgate, or to a worse place, upon
suspicion; indeed, I think I could have killed her with my own hands.

As for the poor girl herself, she was ever before my eyes; I saw her by
night and by day; she haunted my imagination, if she did not haunt the
house; my fancy showed me her in a hundred shapes and postures; sleeping
or waking, she was with me. Sometimes I thought I saw her with her
throat cut; sometimes with her head cut, and her brains knocked out;
other times hanged up upon a beam; another time drowned in the great
pond at Camberwell. And all these appearances were terrifying to the
last degree; and that which was still worse, I could really hear nothing
of her; I sent to the captain's wife in Redriff, and she answered me,
she was gone to her relations in Spitalfields. I sent thither, and they
said she was there about three weeks ago, but that she went out in a
coach with the gentlewoman that used to be so kind to her, but whither
she was gone they knew not, for she had not been there since. I sent
back the messenger for a description of the woman she went out with; and
they described her so perfectly, that I knew it to be Amy, and none but
Amy.

I sent word again that Mrs. Amy, who she went out with, left her in two
or three hours, and that they should search for her, for I had a reason
to fear she was murdered. This frighted them all intolerably. They
believed Amy had carried her to pay her a sum of money, and that
somebody had watched her after her having received it, and had robbed
and murdered her.

I believed nothing of that part; but I believed, as it was, that
whatever was done, Amy had done it; and that, in short, Amy had made her
away; and I believed it the more, because Amy came no more near me, but
confirmed her guilt by her absence.

Upon the whole, I mourned thus for her for above a month; but finding
Amy still come not near me, and that I must put my affairs in a posture
that I might go to Holland, I opened all my affairs to my dear trusty
friend the Quaker, and placed her, in matters of trust, in the room of
Amy; and with a heavy, bleeding heart for my poor girl, I embarked with
my spouse, and all our equipage and goods, on board another Holland's
trader, not a packet-boat, and went over to Holland, where I arrived, as
I have said.

I must put in a caution, however, here, that you must not understand me
as if I let my friend the Quaker into any part of the secret history of
my former life; nor did I commit the grand reserved article of all to
her, viz., that I was really the girl's mother, and the Lady Roxana;
there was no need of that part being exposed; and it was always a maxim
with me, that secrets should never be opened without evident utility. It
could be of no manner of use to me or her to communicate that part to
her; besides, she was too honest herself to make it safe to me; for
though she loved me very sincerely, and it was plain by many
circumstances that she did so, yet she would not lie for me upon
occasion, as Amy would, and therefore it was not advisable on any terms
to communicate that part; for if the girl, or any one else, should have
come to her afterwards, and put it home to her, whether she knew that I
was the girl's mother or not, or was the same as the Lady Roxana or not,
she either would not have denied it, or would have done it with so ill a
grace, such blushing, such hesitations and falterings in her answers, as
would have put the matter out of doubt, and betrayed herself and the
secret too.

For this reason, I say, I did not discover anything of that kind to her;
but I placed her, as I have said, in Amy's stead in the other affairs of
receiving money, interests, rents, and the like, and she was as faithful
as Amy could be, and as diligent.

But there fell out a great difficulty here, which I knew not how to get
over; and this was how to convey the usual supply of provision and money
to the uncle and the other sister, who depended, especially the sister,
upon the said supply for her support; and indeed, though Amy had said
rashly that she would not take any more notice of the sister, and would
leave her to perish, as above, yet it was neither in my nature, or Amy's
either, much less was it in my design; and therefore I resolved to leave
the management of what I had reserved for that work with my faithful
Quaker, but how to direct her to manage them was the great difficulty.

Amy had told them in so many words that she was not their mother, but
that she was the maid Amy, that carried them to their aunt's; that she
and their mother went over to the East Indies to seek their fortune, and
that there good things had befallen them, and that their mother was very
rich and happy; that she (Amy) had married in the Indies, but being now
a widow, and resolving to come over to England, their mother had obliged
her to inquire them out, and do for them as she had done; and that now
she was resolved to go back to the Indies again; but that she had orders
from their mother to do very handsomely by them; and, in a word, told
them she had £2000 apiece for them, upon condition that they proved
sober, and married suitably to themselves, and did not throw themselves
away upon scoundrels.

The good family in whose care they had been, I had resolved to take more
than ordinary notice of; and Amy, by my order, had acquainted them with
it, and obliged my daughters to promise to submit to their government,
as formerly, and to be ruled by the honest man as by a father and
counsellor; and engaged him to treat them as his children. And to oblige
him effectually to take care of them, and to make his old age
comfortable both to him and his wife, who had been so good to the
orphans, I had ordered her to settle the other £2000, that is to say,
the interest of it, which was £120 a year, upon them, to be theirs for
both their lives, but to come to my two daughters after them. This was
so just, and was so prudently managed by Amy, that nothing she ever did
for me pleased me better. And in this posture, leaving my two daughters
with their ancient friend, and so coming away to me (as they thought to
the East Indies), she had prepared everything in order to her going over
with me to Holland; and in this posture that matter stood when that
unhappy girl, who I have said so much of, broke in upon all our
measures, as you have heard, and, by an obstinacy never to be conquered
or pacified, either with threats or persuasions, pursued her search
after me (her mother) as I have said, till she brought me even to the
brink of destruction; and would, in all probability, have traced me out
at last, if Amy had not, by the violence of her passion, and by a way
which I had no knowledge of, and indeed abhorred, put a stop to her, of
which I cannot enter into the particulars here.

However, notwithstanding this, I could not think of going away and
leaving this work so unfinished as Amy had threatened to do, and for the
folly of one child to leave the other to starve, or to stop my
determined bounty to the good family I have mentioned. So, in a word, I
committed the finishing it all to my faithful friend the Quaker, to whom
I communicated as much of the whole story as was needful to empower her
to perform what Amy had promised, and to make her talk so much to the
purpose, as one employed more remotely than Amy had been, needed to be.

To this purpose she had, first of all, a full possession of the money;
and went first to the honest man and his wife, and settled all the
matter with them; when she talked of Mrs. Amy, she talked of her as one
that had been empowered by the mother of the girls in the Indies, but
was obliged to go back to the Indies, and had settled all sooner if she
had not been hindered by the obstinate humour of the other daughter;
that she had left instructions with her for the rest; but that the other
had affronted her so much that she was gone away without doing anything
for her; and that now, if anything was done, it must be by fresh orders
from the East Indies.

I need not say how punctually my new agent acted; but, which was more,
she brought the old man and his wife, and my other daughter, several
times to her house, by which I had an opportunity, being there only as a
lodger, and a stranger, to see my other girl, which I had never done
before, since she was a little child.

The day I contrived to see them I was dressed up in a Quaker's habit,
and looked so like a Quaker, that it was impossible for them, who had
never seen me before, to suppose I had ever been anything else; also my
way of talking was suitable enough to it, for I had learned that long
before.

I have not time here to take notice what a surprise it was to me to see
my child; how it worked upon my affections; with what infinite struggle
I mastered a strong inclination that I had to discover myself to her;
how the girl was the very counterpart of myself, only much handsomer;
and how sweetly and modestly she behaved; how, on that occasion, I
resolved to do more for her than I had appointed by Amy, and the like.

It is enough to mention here, that as the settling this affair made way
for my going on board, notwithstanding the absence of my old agent Amy,
so, however, I left some hints for Amy too, for I did not yet despair of
my hearing from her; and that if my good Quaker should ever see her
again, she should let her see them; wherein, particularly, ordering her
to leave the affair of Spitalfields just as I had done, in the hands of
my friend, she should come away to me; upon this condition,
nevertheless, that she gave full satisfaction to my friend the Quaker
that she had not murdered my child; for if she had, I told her I would
never see her face more. However, notwithstanding this, she came over
afterwards, without giving my friend any of that satisfaction, or any
account that she intended to come over.

I can say no more now, but that, as above, being arrived in Holland,
with my spouse and his son, formerly mentioned, I appeared there with
all the splendour and equipage suitable to our new prospect, as I have
already observed.

Here, after some few years of flourishing and outwardly happy
circumstances, I fell into a dreadful course of calamities, and Amy
also; the very reverse of our former good days. The blast of Heaven
seemed to follow the injury done the poor girl by us both, and I was
brought so low again, that my repentance seemed to be only the
consequence of my misery, as my misery was of my crime.




CONTINUATION

(_From the 1745 Edition_)


In resolving to go to Holland with my husband, and take possession of
the title of countess as soon as possible, I had a view of deceiving my
daughter, were she yet alive, and seeking me out; for it seldom happens
that a nobleman, or his lady, are called by their surnames, and as she
was a stranger to our noble title, might have inquired at our next door
neighbours for Mr. ----, the Dutch merchant, and not have been one jot
the wiser for her inquiry. So one evening, soon after this resolution,
as I and my husband were sitting together when supper was over, and
talking of several various scenes in life, I told him that, as there was
no likelihood of my being with child, as I had some reason to suspect I
was some time before, I was ready to go with him to any part of the
world, whenever he pleased. I said, that great part of my things were
packed up, and what was not would not be long about, and that I had
little occasion to buy any more clothes, linen, or jewels, whilst I was
in England, having a large quantity of the richest and best of
everything by me already. On saying these words, he took me in his
arms, and told me that he looked on what I had now spoken with so great
an emphasis, to be my settled resolution, and the fault should not lie
on his side if it miscarried being put in practice.

The next morning he went out to see some merchants, who had received
advice of the arrival of some shipping which had been in great danger at
sea, and whose insurance had run very high; and it was this interval
that gave me an opportunity of my coming to a final resolution. I now
told the Quaker, as she was sitting at work in her parlour, that we
should very speedily leave her, and although she daily expected it, yet
she was really sorry to hear that we had come to a full determination;
she said abundance of fine things to me on the happiness of the life I
did then, and was going to live; believing, I suppose, that a countess
could not have a foul conscience; but at that very instant, I would
have, had it been in my power, resigned husband, estate, title, and all
the blessings she fancied I had in the world, only for her real virtue,
and the sweet peace of mind, joined to a loving company of children,
which she really possessed.

When my husband returned, he asked me at dinner if I persevered in my
resolution of leaving England; to which I answered in the affirmative.
"Well," says he, "as all my affairs will not take up a week's time to
settle, I will be ready to go from London with you in ten days' time."
We fixed upon no particular place or abode, but in general concluded to
go to Dover, cross the Channel to Calais, and proceed from thence by
easy journeys to Paris, where after staying about a week, we intended to
go through part of France, the Austrian Netherlands, and so on to
Amsterdam, Rotterdam, or the Hague, as we were to settle before we went
from Paris. As my husband did not care to venture all our fortune in one
bottom, so our goods, money, and plate were consigned to several
merchants, who had been his intimates many years, and he took notes of a
prodigious value in his pocket, besides what he gave me to take care of
during our journey. The last thing to be considered was, how we should
go ourselves, and what equipage we should take with us; my thoughts were
wholly taken up about it some time; I knew I was going to be a countess,
and did not care to appear anything mean before I came to that honour;
but, on the other hand, if I left London in any public way, I might
possibly hear of inquiries after me in the road, that I had been
acquainted with before. At last I said we would discharge all our
servants, except two footmen, who should travel with us to Dover, and
one maid to wait on me, that had lived with me only since the retreat of
Amy, and she was to go through, if she was willing; and as to the
carriage of us, a coach should be hired for my husband, myself, and
maid, and two horses were to be hired for the footmen, who were to
return with them to London.

When the Quaker had heard when and how we intended to go, she begged, as
there would be a spare seat in the coach, to accompany us as far as
Dover, which we both readily consented to; no woman could be a better
companion, neither was there any acquaintance that we loved better, or
could show more respect to us.

The morning before we set out, my husband sent for a master coachman to
know the price of a handsome coach, with six able horses, to go to
Dover. He inquired how many days we intended to be on the journey? My
husband said he would go but very easy, and chose to be three days on
the road; that they should stay there two days, and be three more
returning to London, with a gentlewoman (meaning the Quaker) in it. The
coachman said it would be an eight days' journey, and he would have ten
guineas for it. My husband consented to pay him his demand, and he
received orders to be ready at the door by seven of the clock the next
morning: I was quite prepared to go, having no person to take leave of
but the Quaker, and she had desired to see us take the packet-boat at
Dover, before we parted with her; and the last night of my stay in
London was spent very agreeably with the Quaker and her family. My
husband, who stayed out later than usual, in taking his farewell of
several merchants of his acquaintance, came home about eleven o'clock,
and drank a glass or two of wine with us before we went to bed.

The next morning, the whole family got up about five o'clock, and I,
with my husband's consent, made each of the Quaker's daughters a present
of a diamond ring, valued at £20, and a guinea apiece to all the
servants, without exception. We all breakfasted together, and at the
hour appointed, the coach and attendants came to the door; this drew
several people about it, who were all very inquisitive to know who was
going into the country, and what is never forgot on such occasions, all
the beggars in the neighbourhood were prepared to give us their
benedictions in hopes of an alms. When the coachmen had packed up what
boxes were designed for our use, we, namely, my husband, the Quaker,
myself, and the waiting-maid, all got into the coach, the footmen were
mounted on horses behind, and in this manner the coach, after I had
given a guinea to one of the Quaker's daughters equally to divide among
the beggars at the door, drove away from the house, and I took leave of
my lodging in the Minories, as well as of London.

At St. George's Church, Southwark, we were met by three gentlemen on
horseback, who were merchants of my husband's acquaintance, and had come
out on purpose, to go half a day's journey with us; and as they kept
talking to us at the coach side, we went a good pace, and were very
merry together; we stopped at the best house of entertainment on
Shooter's Hill.

Here we stopped for about an hour, and drank some wine, and my husband,
whose chief study was how to please and divert me, caused me to alight
out of the coach; which the gentlemen who accompanied us observing,
alighted also. The waiter showed us upstairs into a large room, whose
window opened to our view a fine prospect of the river Thames, which
here, they say, forms one of the most beautiful meanders. It was within
an hour of high water, and such a number of ships coming in under sail
quite astonished as well as delighted me, insomuch that I could not help
breaking out into such-like expressions, "My dear, what a fine sight
this is; I never saw the like before! Pray will they get to London this
tide?" At which the good-natured gentleman smiled, and said, "Yes, my
dear; why, there is London, and as the wind is quite fair for them, some
of them will come to an anchor in about half-an-hour, and all within an
hour."

I was so taken up with looking down the river that, till my husband
spoke, I had not once looked up the river; but when I did, and saw
London, the Monument, the cathedral church of St. Paul, and the steeples
belonging to the several parish churches, I was transported into an
ecstasy, and could not refrain from saying, "Sure that cannot be the
place we are now just come from, it must be further off, for that looks
to be scarce three miles off, and we have been three hours, by my watch,
coming from our lodgings in the Minories! No, no, it is not London, it
is some other place!"

Upon which one of the gentlemen present offered to convince me that the
place I saw was London if I would go up to the top of the house, and
view it from the turret. I accepted the offer, and I, my husband, and
the three gentlemen were conducted by the master of the house upstairs
into the turret. If I was delighted before with my prospect, I was now
ravished, for I was elevated above the room I was in before upwards of
thirty feet. I seemed a little dizzy, for the turret being a lantern,
and giving light all ways, for some time I thought myself suspended in
the air; but sitting down, and having eat a mouthful of biscuit and
drank a glass of sack, I soon recovered, and then the gentleman who had
undertaken to convince me that the place I was shown was really London,
thus began, after having drawn aside one of the windows.

"You see, my lady," says the gentleman, "the greatest, the finest, the
richest, and the most populous city in the world, at least in Europe, as
I can assure your ladyship, upon my own knowledge, it deserves the
character I have given it." "But this, sir, will never convince me that
the place you now show me is London, though I have before heard that
London deserves the character you have with so much cordiality bestowed
upon it. And this I can testify, that London, in every particular you
have mentioned, greatly surpasses Paris, which is allowed by all
historians and travellers to be the second city in Europe."

Here the gentleman, pulling out his pocket-glass, desired me to look
through it, which I did; and then he directed me to look full at St.
Paul's, and to make that the centre of my future observation, and
thereupon he promised me conviction.

Whilst I took my observation, I sat in a high chair, made for that
purpose, with a convenience before you to hold the glass. I soon found
the cathedral, and then I could not help saying I have been several
times up to the stone gallery, but not quite so often up to the iron
gallery. Then I brought my eye to the Monument, and was obliged to
confess I knew it to be such. The gentleman then moved the glass and
desired me to look, which doing, I said, "I think I see Whitehall and
St. James's Park, and I see also two great buildings like barns, but I
do not know what they are." "Oh," says the gentleman, "they are the
Parliament House and Westminster Abbey." "They may be so," said I; and
continuing looking, I perceived the very house at Kensington which I had
lived in some time; but of that I took no notice, yet I found my colour
come, to think what a life of gaiety and wickedness I had lived. The
gentleman, perceiving my disorder, said, "I am afraid I have tired your
ladyship; I will make but one remove, more easterly, and then I believe
you will allow the place we see to be London."

He might have saved himself the trouble, for I was thoroughly convinced
of my error; but to give myself time to recover, and to hide my
confusion, I seemed not yet to be quite convinced. I looked, and the
first object that presented itself was Aldgate Church, which, though I
confess to my shame, I seldom saw the inside of it, yet I was well
acquainted with the outside, for many times my friend the Quaker and I
had passed and repassed by it when we used to go in the coach to take an
airing. I saw the church, or the steeple of the church, so plain, and
knew it so well, that I could not help saying, with some earnestness,
"My dear, I see our church; the church, I mean, belonging to our
neighbourhood; I am sure it is Aldgate Church." Then I saw the Tower,
and all the shipping; and, taking my eye from the glass, I thanked the
gentleman for the trouble I had given him, and said to him that I was
fully convinced that the place I saw was London, and that it was the
very place we came from that morning.

When we came to Sittingbourne, our servant soon brought us word that
although we were at the best inn in the town, yet there was nothing in
the larder fit for our dinner. The landlord came in after him and began
to make excuses for his empty cupboard. He told us, withal, that if we
would please to stay, he would kill a calf, a sheep, a hog, or anything
we had a fancy to. We ordered him to kill a pig and some pigeons, which,
with a dish of fish, a cherry pie, and some pastry, made up a tolerable
dinner. We made up two pounds ten shillings, for we caused the landlord,
his wife, and two daughters, to dine with us, and help us off with our
wine. Our landlady and her two daughters, with a glass or two given to
the cook, managed two bottles of white wine. This operated so strong
upon one of the young wenches that, my spouse being gone out into the
yard, her tongue began to run; and, looking at me, she says to her
mother, "La! mother, how much like the lady her ladyship is" (speaking
of me), "the young woman who lodged here the other night, and stayed
here part of the next day, and then set forward for Canterbury,
described. The lady is the same person, I'm sure."

This greatly alarmed me, and made me very uneasy, for I concluded this
young woman could be no other than my daughter, who was resolved to find
me out, whether I would or no. I desired the girl to describe the young
woman she mentioned, which she did, and I was convinced it was my own
daughter. I asked in what manner she travelled, and whether she had any
company. I was answered that she was on foot, and that she had no
company; but that she always travelled from place to place in company;
that her method was, when she came into any town, to go to the best inns
and inquire for the lady she sought; and then, when she had satisfied
herself that the lady, whom she called her mother, was not to be found
in that town or neighbourhood, she then begged the favour of the
landlady of the inn where she was, to put her into such a company that
she knew that she might go safe to the next town; that this was the
manner of her proceeding at her house, and she believed she had
practised it ever since she set out from London; and she hoped to meet
with her mother, as she called her, upon the road.

I asked my landlady whether she described our coach and equipage, but
she said the young woman did not inquire concerning equipage, but only
described a lady "so like your ladyship, that I have often, since I saw
your ladyship, took you to be the very person she was looking for."

Amidst the distractions of my mind, this afforded me some comfort, that
my daughter was not in the least acquainted with the manner in which we
travelled. My husband and the landlord returned, and that put an end to
the discourse.

I left this town with a heavy heart, feeling my daughter would
infallibly find me out at Canterbury; but, as good luck would have it,
she had left that city before we came thither, some time. I was very
short in one thing, that I had not asked my landlady at Sittingbourne
how long it was since my daughter was there. But when I came to
Canterbury I was a very anxious and indefatigable in inquiring after my
daughter, and I found that she had been at the inn where we then were,
and had inquired for me, as I found by the description the people gave
of myself.

Here I learnt my daughter had left Canterbury a week. This pleased me;
and I was determined to stay in Canterbury one day, to view the
cathedral, and see the antiquities of this metropolis.

As we had sixteen miles to our journey's end that night, for it was near
four o'clock before we got into our coach again, the coachman drove with
great speed, and at dusk in the evening we entered the west gate of the
city, and put up at an inn in High Street (near St. Mary Bredman's
church), which generally was filled with the best of company. The
anxiety of my mind, on finding myself pursued by this girl, and the
fatigue of my journey, had made me much out of order, my head ached, and
I had no stomach.

This made my husband (but he knew not the real occasion of my illness)
and the Quaker very uneasy, and they did all in their power to persuade
me to eat anything I could fancy.

At length the landlady of the inn, who perceived I was more disturbed in
my mind than sick, advised me to eat one poached egg, drink a glass of
sack, eat a toast, and go to bed, and she warranted, she said, I should
be well by the morning. This was immediately done; and I must
acknowledge, that the sack and toast cheered me wonderfully, and I began
to take heart again; and my husband would have the coachman in after
supper, on purpose to divert me and the honest Quaker, who, poor
creature, seemed much more concerned at my misfortune than I was myself.

I went soon to bed, but for fear I should be worse in the night, two
maids of the inn were ordered to sit up in an adjoining chamber; the
Quaker and my waiting-maid lay in a bed in the same room, and my
husband by himself in another apartment.

While my maid was gone down on some necessary business, and likewise to
get me some burnt wine, which I was to drink going to bed, or rather
when I was just got into bed, the Quaker and I had the following
dialogue:

_Quaker._ The news thou heardest at Sittingbourne has disordered thee. I
am glad the young woman has been out of this place a week; she went
indeed for Dover; and when she comes there and canst not find thee, she
may go to Deal, and so miss of thee.

_Roxana._ What I most depend upon is, that as we do not travel by any
particular name, but the general one of the baronet and his lady, and
the girl hath no notion what sort of equipage we travelled with, it was
not easy to make a discovery of me, unless she accidentally, in her
travels, light upon you (meaning the Quaker), or upon me; either of
which must unavoidably blow the secret I had so long laboured to
conceal.

_Quaker._ As thou intendest to stay here to-morrow, to see the things
which thou callest antiquities, and which are more properly named the
relics of the Whore of Babylon; suppose thou wert to send Thomas, who at
thy command followeth after us, to the place called Dover, to inquire
whether such a young woman has been inquiring for thee. He may go out
betimes in the morning, and may return by night, for it is but twelve
or fourteen miles at farthest thither.

_Roxana._ I like thy scheme very well; and I beg the favour of you in
the morning, as soon as you are up, to send Tom to Dover, with such
instructions as you shall think proper.

After a good night's repose I was well recovered, to the great
satisfaction of all that were with me.

The good-natured Quaker, always studious to serve and oblige me, got up
about five o'clock in the morning, and going down into the inn-yard, met
with Tom, gave him his instructions, and he set out for Dover before six
o'clock.

As we were at the best inn in the city, so we could readily have
whatever we pleased, and whatever the season afforded; but my husband,
the most indulgent man that ever breathed, having observed how heartily
I ate my dinner at Rochester two days before, ordered the very same bill
of fare, and of which I made a heartier meal than I did before. We were
very merry, and after we had dined, we went to see the town-house, but
as it was near five o'clock I left the Quaker behind me, to receive what
intelligence she could get concerning my daughter, from the footman, who
was expected to return from Dover at six.

We came to the inn just as it was dark, and then excusing myself to my
husband, I immediately ran up into my chamber, where I had appointed the
Quaker to be against my return. I ran to her with eagerness, and
inquired what news from Dover, by Tom, the footman.

She said, Tom had been returned two hours; that he got to Dover that
morning between seven and eight, and found, at the inn he put up at,
there had been an inquisitive young woman to find out a gentleman that
was a Dutch merchant, and a lady who was her mother; that the young
woman perfectly well described his lady; that he found that she had
visited every public inn in the town; that she said she would go to
Deal, and that if she did not find the lady, her mother, there, she
would go by the first ship to the Hague, and go from thence, to
Amsterdam and Rotterdam, searching all the towns through which she
passed in the United Provinces.

This account pleased me very well, especially when I understood that she
had been gone from Dover five days. The Quaker comforted me, and said it
was lucky this busy creature had passed the road before us, otherwise
she might easily have found means to have overtaken us, for, as she
observed, the wench had such an artful way of telling her story, that
she moved everybody to compassion; and she did not doubt but that if we
had been before, as we were behind, she would have got those who would
have assisted her with a coach, &c., to have pursued us, and they might
have come up with us.

I was of the honest Quaker's sentiments. I grew pretty easy, called Tom,
and gave him half a guinea for his diligence; then I and the Quaker went
into the parlour to my husband, and soon after supper came in, and I
ate moderately, and we spent the remainder of the evening, for the clock
had then tolled nine, very cheerfully; for my Quaker was so rejoiced at
my good fortune, as she called it, that she was very alert, and
exceeding good company; and her wit, and she had no small share of it, I
thought was better played off than ever I had heard it before.

My husband asked me how I should choose to go on board; I desired him to
settle it as he pleased, telling him it was a matter of very great
indifference to me, as he was to go with me. "That may be true, my
dear," says he, "but I ask you for a reason or two, which I will lay
before you, viz., if we hire a vessel for ourselves, we may set sail
when we please, have the liberty of every part of the ship to ourselves,
and land at what port, either in Holland or France, we might make choice
of. Besides," added he, "another reason I mention it to you is, that I
know you do not love much company, which, in going into the packet-boat,
it is almost impossible to avoid." "I own, my dear," said I, "your
reasons are very good; I have but one thing to say against them, which
is, that the packet-boat, by its frequent voyages, must of course be
furnished with experienced seamen, who know the seas too well even to
run any hazard." (At this juncture the terrible voyage I and Amy made
from France to Harwich came so strong in my mind, that I trembled so as
to be taken notice of by my husband.) "Besides," added I, "the landlord
may send the master of one of them to you, and I think it may be best to
hire the state cabin, as they call it, to ourselves, by which method we
shall avoid company, without we have an inclination to associate
ourselves with such passengers we may happen to like; and the expense
will be much cheaper than hiring a vessel to go the voyage with us
alone, and every whit as safe."

The Quaker, who had seriously listened to our discourse, gave it as her
opinion that the method I had proposed was by far the safest, quickest,
and cheapest. "Not," said she, "as I think thou wouldest be against any
necessary expense, though I am certain thou wouldest not fling thy money
away."

Soon after, my husband ordered the landlord to send for one of the
masters of the packet-boats, of whom he hired the great cabin, and
agreed to sail from thence the next day, if the wind and the tide
answered.

The settling our method of going over sea had taken up the time till the
dinner was ready, which we being informed of, came out of a chamber we
had been in all the morning, to a handsome parlour, where everything was
placed suitable to our rank; there was a large, old-fashioned service of
plate, and a sideboard genteelly set off. The dinner was excellent, and
well dressed.

After dinner, we entered into another discourse, which was the hiring of
servants to go with us from Dover to Paris; a thing frequently done by
travellers; and such are to be met with at every stage inn. Our footmen
set out this morning on their return to London, and the Quaker and coach
was to go the next day. My new chambermaid, whose name was Isabel, was
to go through the journey, on condition of doing no other business than
waiting on me. In a while we partly concluded to let the hiring of
men-servants alone till we came to Calais, for they could be of no use
to us on board a ship, the sailor's or cabin boy's place being to attend
the cabin passengers as well as his master.

To divert ourselves, we took a walk after we had dined, round about the
town, and coming to the garrison, and being somewhat thirsty, all went
into the sutler's for a glass of wine. A pint was called for and
brought; but the man of the house came in with it raving like a madman,
saying, "Don't you think you are a villain, to ask for a pot of ale when
I know you have spent all your money, and are ignorant of the means of
getting more, without you hear of a place, which I look upon to be very
unlikely?" "Don't be in such a passion, landlord," said my husband.
"Pray, what is the matter?" "Oh, nothing, sir," says he; "but a young
fellow in the sutling room, whom I find to have been a gentleman's
servant, wants a place; and having spent all his money, would willingly
run up a score with me, knowing I must get him a master if ever I intend
to have my money." "Pray, sir," said my husband, "send the young fellow
to me; if I like him, and can agree with him, it is possible I may take
him into my service." The landlord took care we should not speak to him
twice, he went and fetched him in himself, and my husband examined him
before he spoke, as to his size, mien, and garb. The young man was clean
dressed, of a middling stature, a dark complexion, and about
twenty-seven years old.

"I hear, young man," says he to him, "that you want a place; it may
perhaps be in my power to serve you. Let me know at once what education
you have had, if you have any family belonging to you, or if you are fit
for a gentleman's service, can bring any person of reputation to your
character, and are willing to go and live in Holland with me: we will
not differ about your wages."

The young fellow made a respectful bow to each of us, and addressed
himself to my husband as follows: "Sir," said he, "in me you behold the
eldest child of misfortune. I am but young, as you may see; I have no
comers after me, and having lived with several gentlemen, some of whom
are on their travels, others settled in divers parts of the world,
besides what are dead, makes me unable to produce a character without a
week's notice to write to London, and I should not doubt but by the
return of the post to let you see some letters as would satisfy you in
any doubts about me. My education," continued he, "is but very middling,
being taken from school before I had well learnt to read, write, and
cast accounts; and as to my parentage, I cannot well give you any
account of them: all that I know is, that my father was a brewer, and by
his extravagance ran out a handsome fortune, and afterwards left my poor
mother almost penniless, with five small children, of which I was the
second, though not above five years old. My mother knew not what to do
with us, so she sent a poor girl, our maid, whose name I have forgot
this many years, with us all to a relation's, and there left us, and I
never saw or heard of or from them any more. Indeed, I inquired among
the neighbours, and all that I could learn was that my mother's goods
were seized, that she was obliged to apply to the parish for relief, and
died of grief soon after. For my part," says he, "I was put into the
hands of my father's sister, where, by her cruel usage, I was forced to
run away at nine years of age; and the numerous scenes of life I have
since gone through are more than would fill a small volume. Pray, sir,"
added he, "let it satisfy you that I am thoroughly honest, and should be
glad to serve you at any rate; and although I cannot possibly get a good
character from anybody at present, yet I defy the whole world to give me
an ill one, either in public or private life."

If I had had the eyes of Argus I should have seen with them all on this
occasion. I knew that this was my son, and one that, among all my
inquiry, I could never get any account of. The Quaker seeing my colour
come and go, and also tremble, said, "I verily believe thou art not
well; I hope this Kentish air, which was always reckoned aguish, does
not hurt thee?" "I am taken very sick of a sudden," said I; "so pray let
me go to our inn that I may go to my chamber." Isabel being called in,
she and the Quaker attended me there, leaving the young fellow with my
spouse. When I was got into my chamber I was seized with such a grief as
I had never known before; and flinging myself down upon the bed, burst
into a flood of tears, and soon after fainted away. Soon after, I came a
little to myself, and the Quaker begged of me to tell her what was the
cause of my sudden indisposition. "Nothing at all," says I, "as I know
of; but a sudden chilliness seized my blood, and that, joined to a
fainting of the spirits, made me ready to sink."

Presently after my husband came to see how I did, and finding me
somewhat better, he told me that he had a mind to hire the young man I
had left him with, for he believed he was honest and fit for our
service. "My dear," says I, "I did not mind him. I would desire you to
be cautious who we pick up on the road; but as I have the satisfaction
of hiring my maids, I shall never trouble myself with the men-servants,
that is wholly your province. However," added I (for I was very certain
he was my son, and was resolved to have him in my service, though it was
my interest to keep my husband off, in order to bring him on), "if you
like the fellow, I am not averse to your hiring one servant in England.
We are not obliged to trust him with much before we see his conduct,
and if he does not prove as you may expect, you may turn him off
whenever you please." "I believe," said my husband, "he has been
ingenuous in his relation to me; and as a man who has seen great variety
of life, and may have been the shuttlecock of fortune, the butt of envy,
and the mark of malice, I will hire him when he comes to me here anon,
as I have ordered him."

As I knew he was to be hired, I resolved to be out of the way when he
came to my husband; so about five o'clock I proposed to the Quaker to
take a walk on the pier and see the shipping, while the tea-kettle was
boiling. We went, and took Isabel with us, and as we were going along I
saw my son Thomas (as I shall for the future call him) going to our inn;
so we stayed out about an hour, and when we returned my husband told me
he had hired the man, and that he was to come to him as a servant on the
morrow morning. "Pray, my dear," said I, "did you ask where he ever
lived, or what his name is?" "Yes," replied my husband, "he says his
name is Thomas ----; and as to places, he has mentioned several families
of note, and among others, he lived at my Lord ----'s, next door to the
great French lady's in Pall Mall, whose name he tells me was Roxana." I
was now in a sad dilemma, and was fearful I should be known by my own
son; and the Quaker took notice of it, and afterwards told me she
believed fortune had conspired that all the people I became acquainted
with, should have known the Lady Roxana. "I warrant," said she, "this
young fellow is somewhat acquainted with the impertinent wench that
calls herself thy daughter."

I was very uneasy in mind, but had one thing in my favour, which was
always to keep myself at a very great distance from my servants; and as
the Quaker was to part with us the next day or night, he would have
nobody to mention the name Roxana to, and so of course it would drop.

We supped pretty late at night, and were very merry, for my husband said
all the pleasant things he could think of, to divert me from the
supposed illness he thought I had been troubled with in the day. The
Quaker kept up the discourse with great spirit, and I was glad to
receive the impression, for I wanted the real illness to be drove out of
my head.

The next morning, after breakfast, Thomas came to his new place. He
appeared very clean, and brought with him a small bundle, which I
supposed to be linen tied up in a handkerchief. My husband sent him to
order some porters belonging to the quay to fetch our boxes to the
Custom-house, where they were searched, for which we paid one shilling;
and he had orders to give a crown for head money, as they called it;
their demand by custom is but sixpence a head, but we appeared to our
circumstances in everything. As soon as our baggage was searched, it was
carried from the Custom-house on board the packet-boat, and there
lodged in the great cabin as we had ordered it.

This took up the time till dinner, and when we were sitting together
after we had both dined, the captain came to tell us that the wind was
very fair, and that he was to sail at high water, which would be about
ten o'clock at night. My husband asked him to stay and drink part of a
bottle of wine with him, which he did; and their discourse being all in
the maritime strain, the Quaker and I retired and left them together,
for I had something to remind her of in our discourse before we left
London. When we got into the garden, which was rather neat than fine, I
repeated all my former requests to her about my children, Spitalfields,
Amy, &c., and we sat talking together till Thomas was sent to tell us
the captain was going, on which we returned; but, by the way, I kissed
her and put a large gold medal into her hand, as a token of my sincere
love, and desired that she would never neglect the things she had
promised to perform, and her repeated promise gave me great
satisfaction.

The captain, who was going out of the parlour as we returned in, was
telling my husband he would send six of his hands to conduct us to the
boat, about a quarter of an hour before he sailed, and as the moon was
at the full, he did not doubt of a pleasant passage.

Our next business was to pay off the coachman, to whom my husband gave
half a guinea extraordinary, to set the Quaker down at the house he
took us all up at, which he promised to perform.

As it was low water, we went on board to see the cabin that we were to
go our voyage in, and the captain would detain us to drink a glass of
the best punch, I think, I ever tasted.

When we returned to the inn, we ordered supper to be ready by eight
o'clock, that we might drink a parting glass to settle it, before we
went on board; for my husband, who knew the sea very well, said a full
stomach was the forerunner of sea-sickness, which I was willing to
avoid.

We invited the landlord, his wife, and daughter, to supper with us, and
having sat about an hour afterwards, the captain himself, with several
sailors, came to fetch us to the vessel. As all was paid, we had nothing
to hinder us but taking a final leave of the Quaker, who would go to see
us safe in the vessel, where tears flowed from both our eyes; and I
turned short in the boat, while my husband took his farewell, and he
then followed me, and I never saw the Quaker or England any more.

We were no sooner on board than we hoisted sail; the anchors being up,
and the wind fair, we cut the waves at a great rate, till about four
o'clock in the morning, when a French boat came to fetch the mail to
carry it to the post-house, and the boat cast her anchors, for we were a
good distance from the shore, neither could we sail to the town till
next tide, the present one being too far advanced in the ebb.

We might have gone on shore in the boat that carried the mail, but my
husband was sleeping in the cabin when it came to the packet-boat, and I
did not care to disturb him; however, we had an opportunity soon after,
for my husband awaking, and two other boats coming up with oars to see
for passengers, Thomas came to let us know we might go on shore, if we
pleased. My husband paid the master of the packet-boat for our passage,
and Thomas, with the sailors' assistance, got our boxes into the wherry,
so we sailed for Calais; but before our boat came to touch ground,
several men, whose bread I suppose it is, rushed into the water, without
shoes or stockings, to carry us on shore; so having paid ten shillings
for the wherry, we each of us was carried from the boat to the land by
two men, and our goods brought after us; here was a crown to be paid, to
save ourselves from being wet, by all which a man that is going a
travelling may see that it is not the bare expense of the packet-boat
that will carry him to Calais.

It would be needless to inform the reader of all the ceremonies that we
passed through at this place before we were suffered to proceed on our
journey; however, our boxes having been searched at the Custom-house, my
husband had them plumbed, as they called it, to hinder any further
inquiry about them; and we got them all to the Silver Lion, a noted inn,
and the post-house of this place, where we took a stage-coach for
ourselves, and the next morning, having well refreshed ourselves, we
all, viz., my husband, self, and chambermaid within the coach, and
Thomas behind (beside which my husband hired two horsemen well armed,
who were pretty expensive, to travel with us), set forward on our
journey.

We were five days on our journey from Calais to Paris, which we went
through with much satisfaction, for, having fine weather and good
attendance, we had nothing to hope for.

When we arrived at Paris (I began to be sorry I had ever proposed going
to it for fear of being known, but as we were to stay there but a few
days, I was resolved to keep very retired), we went to a merchant's
house of my husband's acquaintance in the Rue de la Bourle, near the
Carmelites, in the Faubourg de St. Jacques.

This being a remote part of the city, on the south side, and near
several pleasant gardens, I thought it would be proper to be a little
indisposed, that my husband might not press me to go with him to see the
curiosities; for he could do the most needful business, such as going to
the bankers to exchange bills, despatching of letters, settling affairs
with merchants, &c., without my assistance; and I had a tolerable plea
for my conduct, such as the great fatigue of our journey, being among
strangers, &c.; so we stayed at Paris eight days without my going to any
particular places, except going one day to the gardens of Luxembourg,
another to the church of Notre Dame on the Isle of Paris, a third to the
Hôtel Royale des Invalides, a fourth to the gardens of the Tuileries, a
fifth to the suburbs of St. Lawrence, to see the fair which was then
holding there; a sixth to the gardens of the Louvre, a seventh to the
playhouse, and the eighth stayed all day at home to write a letter to
the Quaker, letting her know where I then was, and how soon we should go
forwards in our journey, but did not mention where we intended to
settle, as, indeed, we had not yet settled that ourselves.

One of the days, viz., that in which I went to the gardens of the
Tuileries, I asked Thomas several questions about his father, mother,
and other relations, being resolved, notwithstanding he was my own son,
as he did not know it, to turn him off by some stratagem or another, if
he had any manner of memory of me, either as his mother, or the Lady
Roxana. I asked him if he had any particular memory of his mother or
father; he answered, "No, I scarce remember anything of either of them,"
said he, "but I have heard from several people that I had one brother
and three sisters, though I never saw them all, to know them,
notwithstanding I lived with an aunt four years; I often asked after my
mother, and some people said she went away with a man, but it was
allowed by most people, that best knew her, that she, being brought to
the greatest distress, was carried to the workhouse belonging to the
parish, where she died soon after with grief."

Nothing could give me more satisfaction than what Thomas had related; so
now, I thought I would ask about the Lady Roxana (for he had been my
next-door neighbour when I had that title conferred on me). "Pray,
Thomas," said I, "did not you speak of a great person of quality, whose
name I have forgot, that lived next door to my Lord ----'s when you was
his valet? pray who was she? I suppose a foreigner, by the name you
called her." "Really, my lady," replied he, "I do not know who she was;
all I can say of her is, that she kept the greatest company, and was a
beautiful woman, by report, but I never saw her; she was called the Lady
Roxana, was a very good mistress, but her character was not so good as
to private life as it ought to be. Though I once had an opportunity,"
continued he, "of seeing a fine outlandish dress she danced in before
the king, which I took as a great favour, for the cook took me up when
the lady was out, and she desired my lady's woman to show it to me."

All this answered right, and I had nothing to do but to keep my Turkish
dress out of the way, to be myself unknown to my child, for as he had
never seen Roxana, so he knew nothing of me.

In the interval, my husband had hired a stage-coach to carry us to the
city of Menin, where he intended to go by water down the river Lys to
Ghent, and there take coach to Isabella fort, opposite the city of
Anvers, and cross the river to that place, and go from thence by land to
Breda; and as he had agreed and settled this patrol, I was satisfied,
and we set out next day. We went through several handsome towns and
villages before we took water, but by water we went round part of the
city of Courtrai, and several fortified towns. At Anvers we hired a
coach to Breda, where we stayed two days to refresh ourselves, for we
had been very much fatigued; as Willemstadt was situated so as to be
convenient for our taking water for Rotterdam, we went there, and being
shipped, had a safe and speedy voyage to that city.

As we had resolved in our journey to settle at the Hague, we did not
intend to stay any longer at Rotterdam, than while my husband had all
our wealth delivered to him from the several merchants he had consigned
it to. This business took up a month, during which time we lived in
ready-furnished lodgings on the Great Quay, where all the respect was
shown us as was due to our quality.

Here my husband hired two more men-servants, and I took two maids, and
turned Isabel, who was a well-bred, agreeable girl, into my companion;
but that I might not be too much fatigued, my husband went to the Hague
first, and left me, with three maids and Thomas, at Rotterdam, while he
took a house, furnished it, and had everything ready for my reception,
which was done with great expedition. One of his footmen came with a
letter to me one morning, to let me know his master would come by the
scow next day to take me home, in which he desired that I would prepare
for my departure. I soon got everything ready, and the next morning, on
the arrival of the scow, I saw my husband; and we both, with all the
servants, left the city of Rotterdam, and safely got to the Hague the
afternoon following.

It was now the servants had notice given them to call me by the name of
"my lady," as the honour of baronetage had entitled me, and with which
title I was pretty well satisfied, but should have been more so had not
I yet the higher title of countess in view.

I now lived in a place where I knew nobody, neither was I known, on
which I was pretty careful whom I became acquainted with; our
circumstances were very good, my husband loving, to the greatest degree,
my servants respectful; and, in short, I lived the happiest life woman
could enjoy, had my former crimes never crept into my guilty conscience.

I was in this happy state of life when I wrote a letter to the Quaker,
in which I gave her a direction where she might send to me. And about a
fortnight after, as I was one afternoon stepping into my coach in order
to take an airing, the postman came to our door with letters, one of
which was directed to me, and as soon as I saw it was the Quaker's hand,
I bid the coachman put up again, and went into my closet to read the
contents, which were as follows:

     "DEAR FRIEND,--I have had occasion to write to thee several times
     since we saw each other, but as this is my first letter, so it
     shall contain all the business thou wouldst know. I got safe to
     London, by thy careful ordering of the coach, and the attendants
     were not at all wanting in their duty. When I had been at home a
     few days, thy woman, Mrs. Amy, came to see me, so I took her to
     task as thou ordered me, about murdering thy pretended daughter;
     she declared her innocence, but said she had procured a false
     evidence to swear a large debt against her, and by that means had
     put her into a prison, and fee'd the keepers to hinder her from
     sending any letter or message out of the prison to any person
     whatever. This, I suppose, was the reason thou thought she was
     murdered, because thou wert relieved from her by this base usage.
     However, when I heard of it, I checked Amy very much, but was well
     satisfied to hear she was alive. After this I did not hear from Amy
     for above a month, and in the interim (as I knew thou wast safe), I
     sent a friend of mine to pay the debt, and release the prisoner,
     which he did, but was so indiscreet as to let her know who was the
     benefactress. My next care was to manage thy Spitalfields business,
     which I did with much exactness. And the day that I received thy
     last letter, Amy came to me again, and I read as much of it to her
     as she was concerned in: nay, I entreated her to drink tea with me,
     and after it one glass of citron, in which she drank towards thy
     good health, and she told me she would come to see thee as soon as
     possible. Just as she was gone, I was reading thy letter again in
     the little parlour, and that turbulent creature (thy pretended
     daughter) came to me, as she said, to return thanks for the favour
     I had done her, so I accidentally laid thy letter down in the
     window, while I went to fetch her a glass of cordial, for she
     looked sadly; and before I returned I heard the street door shut,
     on which I went back without the liquor, not knowing who might have
     come in, but missing her, I thought she might be gone to stand at
     the door, and the wind had blown it to; but I was never the nearer,
     she was sought for in vain. So when I believed her to be quite
     gone, I looked to see if I missed anything, which I did not; but at
     last, to my great surprise, I missed your letter, which she
     certainly took and made off with. I was so terrified at this
     unhappy chance that I fainted away, and had not one of my maidens
     come in at that juncture, it might have been attended with fatal
     consequences. I would advise thee to prepare thyself to see her,
     for I verily believe she will come to thee. I dread your knowing of
     this, but hope the best. Before I went to fetch the unhappy
     cordial, she told me, as she had often done before, that she was
     the eldest daughter, that the captain's wife was your second
     daughter, and her sister, and that the youngest sister was dead.
     She also said there were two brothers, the eldest of whom had never
     been seen by any of them since he run away from an uncle's at nine
     years of age, and that the youngest had been taken care of by an
     old lady that kept her coach, whom he took to be his godmother. She
     gave me a long history in what manner she was arrested and flung
     into Whitechapel jail, how hardly she fared there; and at length
     the keeper's wife, to whom she told her pitiful story, took
     compassion of her, and recommended her to the bounty of a certain
     lady who lived in that neighbourhood, that redeemed prisoners for
     small sums, and who lay for their fees, every return of the day of
     her nativity; that she was one of the six the lady had discharged;
     that the lady prompted her to seek after her mother; that she
     thereupon did seek thee in all the towns and villages between
     London and Dover; that not finding thee at Dover she went to Deal;
     and that at length, she being tired of seeking thee, she returned
     by shipping to London, where she was no sooner arrived but she was
     immediately arrested and flung into the Marshalsea prison, where
     she lived in a miserable condition, without the use of pen, ink,
     and paper, and without the liberty of having any one of her friends
     come near her. 'In this condition I was,' continued she, 'when you
     sent and paid my debt for me, and discharged me.' When she had
     related all this she fell into such a fit of crying, sighing, and
     sobbing, from which, when she was a little recovered, she broke out
     into loud exclamations against the wickedness of the people in
     England, that they could be so unchristian as to arrest her twice,
     when she said it was as true as the Gospel that she never did owe
     to any one person the sum of one shilling in all her life; that she
     could not think who it was that should owe her so much ill-will,
     for that she was not conscious to herself that she had any ways
     offended any person in the whole universal world, except Mrs. Amy,
     in the case of her mother, which, she affirmed, she was acquitted
     of by all men, and hoped she should be so by her Maker; and that if
     she (Mrs. Amy) had any hand in her sufferings, God would forgive
     her, as she heartily did. 'But then,' she added, 'I will not stay
     in England, I will go all over the world, I will go to France, to
     Paris; I know my mother did once live there, and if I do not find
     her there, I will go through Holland, to Amsterdam, to Rotterdam;
     in short, I will go till I find my mother out, if I should die in
     the pursuit.' I should be glad to hear of thine and thy spouse's
     welfare, and remain with much sincerity, your sincere friend,

     "M.P.

     "The ninth of the month called October.

     "P.S.--If thou hast any business to transact in this city, pray let
     me know; I shall use my best endeavours to oblige thee; my
     daughters all join with me in willing thee a hearty farewell."

I concealed my surprise for a few minutes, only till I could get into
the summer-house, at the bottom of our large garden; but when I was shut
in, no living soul can describe the agony I was in, I raved, tore,
fainted away, swore, prayed, wished, cried, and promised, but all
availed nothing, I was now stuck in to see the worst of it, let what
would happen.

At last I came to the following resolution, which was to write a letter
to the Quaker, and in it enclose a fifty pound bank-bill, and tell the
Quaker to give that to the young woman if she called again, and also to
let her know a fifty pound bill should be sent her every year, so long
as she made no inquiry after me, and kept herself retired in England.
Although this opened myself too full to the Quaker, yet I thought I had
better venture my character abroad, than destroy my peace at home.

Soon after, my husband came home, and he perceived I had been crying,
and asked what was the reason. I told him that I had shed tears both
for joy and sorrow: "For," said I, "I have received one of the
tenderest letters from Amy, as it was possible for any person, and she
tells me in it," added I, "that she will soon come to see me; which so
overjoyed me, that I cried, and after it, I went to read the letter a
second time, as I was looking out of the summer-house window over the
canal; and in unfolding it, I accidentally let it fall in, by which
mischance it is lost, for which I am very sorry, as I intended you
should see it." "Pray, my dear," said he, "do not let that give you any
uneasiness; if Amy comes, and you approve of it, you have my consent to
take her into the house, in what capacity you please. I am very glad,"
continued he, "that you have nothing of more consequence to be uneasy
at, I fancy you would make but an indifferent helpmate if you had." Oh!
thought I to myself, if you but knew half the things that lie on my
conscience, I believe you would think that I bear them out past all
example.

About ten days afterwards, as we were sitting at dinner with two
gentlemen, one of the footmen came to the door, and said, "My lady, here
is a gentlewoman at the door who desires to speak with you: she says her
name is Mrs. Amy."

I no sooner heard her name, but I was ready to swoon away, but I ordered
the footman to call Isabel, and ask the gentlewoman to walk up with her
into my dressing-room; which he immediately did, and there I went to
have my first interview with her. She kissed me for joy when she saw
me, and I sent Isabel downstairs, for I was in pain till I had some
private conversation with my old confidante.

There was not much ceremony between us, before I told her all the
material circumstances that had happened in her absence, especially
about the girl's imprisonments which she had contrived, and how she had
got my letter at the Quaker's, the very day she had been there. "Well,"
says Amy, when I had told her all, "I find nothing is to ensue, if she
lives, but your ruin; you would not agree to her death, so I will not
make myself uneasy about her life; it might have been rectified, but you
were angry with me for giving you the best of counsel, viz., when I
proposed to murder her."

"Hussy," said I, in the greatest passion imaginable, "how dare you
mention the word murder? You wretch you, I could find in my heart, if my
husband and the company were gone, to kick you out of my house. Have you
not done enough to kill her, in throwing her into one of the worst jails
in England, where, you see, that Providence in a peculiar manner
appeared to her assistance. Away! thou art a wicked wretch; thou art a
murderer in the sight of God."

"I will say no more," says Amy, "but if I could have found her, after
thy friend the Quaker had discharged her out of the Marshalsea prison, I
had laid a scheme to have her taken up for a theft, and by that means
got her transported for fourteen years. She will be with you soon, I am
sure; I believe she is now in Holland."

While we were in this discourse, I found the gentlemen who dined with us
were going, so we came downstairs, and I went into the parlour to take
leave of them before their departure. When they were gone, my husband
told me he had been talking with them about taking upon him the title of
Count or Earl of ----, as he had told me of, and as an opportunity now
offered, he was going to put it in execution.

I told him I was so well settled, as not to want anything this world
could afford me, except the continuance of his life and love (though the
very thing he had mentioned, joined with the death of my daughter, in
the natural way, would have been much more to my satisfaction). "Well,
my dear," says he, "the expense will be but small, and as I promised you
the title, it shall not be long before the honour shall be brought home
to your toilette." He was as good as his word, for that day week he
brought the patent home to me, in a small box covered with crimson
velvet and two gold hinges. "There, my lady countess," says he, "long
may you live to bear the title, for I am certain you are a credit to
it." In a few days after, I had the pleasure to see our equipage, as
coach, chariot, &c., all new painted, and a coronet fixed at the proper
place, and, in short, everything was proportioned to our quality, so
that our house vied with most of the other nobility.

It was at this juncture that I was at the pinnacle of all my worldly
felicity, notwithstanding my soul was black with the foulest crimes.
And, at the same time, I may begin to reckon the beginning of my
misfortunes, which were in embryo, but were very soon brought forth, and
hurried me on to the greatest distress.

As I was sitting one day talking to Amy in our parlour, and the street
door being left open by one of the servants, I saw my daughter pass by
the window, and without any ceremony she came to the parlour door, and
opening of it, came boldly in. I was terribly amazed, and asked her who
she wanted, as if I had not known her, but Amy's courage was quite lost,
and she swooned away. "Your servant, my lady," says she; "I thought I
should never have had the happiness to see you _tête-à-tête_, till your
agent, the Quaker, in Haydon Yard, in the Minories, carelessly left a
direction for me in her own window; however, she is a good woman, for
she released me out of a jail in which, I believe, that base wretch"
(pointing to Amy, who was coming to herself) "caused me to be confined."
As soon as Amy recovered, she flew at her like a devil, and between them
there was so much noise as alarmed the servants, who all came to see
what was the matter. Amy had pulled down one of my husband's swords,
drawn it, and was just going to run her through the body, as the
servants came in, who not knowing anything of the matter, some of them
secured Amy, others held the girl, and the rest were busy about me, to
prevent my fainting away, which was more than they could do, for I fell
into strong fits, and in the interim they turned the girl out of the
house, who was fully bent on revenge.

My lord, as I now called him, was gone out a-hunting. I was satisfied he
knew nothing of it, as yet, and when Amy and I were thoroughly come to
ourselves, we thought it most advisable to find the girl out, and give
her a handsome sum of money to keep her quiet. So Amy went out, but in
all her searching could hear nothing of her; this made me very uneasy. I
guessed she would contrive to see my lord before he came home, and so it
proved, as you shall presently hear.

When night came on, that I expected his return, I wondered I did not see
him. Amy sat up in my chamber with me, and was as much concerned as was
possible. Well, he did not come in all that night, but the next morning,
about ten o'clock, he rapped at the door, with the girl along with him.
When it was opened, he went into the great parlour, and bid Thomas go
call down his lady. This was the crisis. I now summoned up all my
resolution, and took Amy down with me, to see if we could not baffle the
girl, who, to an inch, was her mother's own child.

It will be necessary here to give a short account of our debate, because
on it all my future misery depended, and it made me lose my husband's
love, and own my daughter; who would not rest there, but told my lord
how many brothers and sisters she had.

When we entered the room, my lord was walking very gravely about it, but
with his brows knit, and a wild confusion in his face, as if all the
malice and revenge of a Dutchman had joined to put me out of countenance
before I spoke a word.

"Pray, madam," says he, "do you know this young woman? I expect a speedy
and positive answer, without the least equivocation."

"Really, my lord," replied I, "to give you an answer as quick as you
desire, I declare I do not."

"Do not!" said he, "what do you mean by that? She tells me that you are
her mother, and that her father ran away from you, and left two sons,
and two daughters besides herself, who were all sent to their relations
for provision, after which you ran away with a jeweller to Paris. Do you
know anything of this? answer me quickly."

"My lord," said the girl, "there is Mrs. Amy, who was my mother's
servant at the time (as she told me herself about three months ago),
knows very well I am the person I pretend to be, and caused me to be
thrown into jail for debts I knew nothing of, because I should not find
out my mother to make myself known to her before she left England."

After this she told my lord everything she knew of me, even in the
character of Roxana, and described my dress so well, that he knew it to
be mine.

[Illustration: ROXANA IS CONFRONTED WITH HER DAUGHTER

"_Pray, madam," says he, "do you know this young woman?_"]

When she had quite gone through her long relation, "Well, madam,"
says he, "now let me see if I cannot tell how far she has told the truth
in relation to you. When I first became acquainted with you, it was on
the sale of those jewels, in which I stood so much your friend, at a
time that you were in the greatest distress, your substance being in the
hands of the Jew; you then passed for a jeweller's widow; this agrees
with her saying you ran away with a jeweller. In the next place, you
would not consent to marry me about twelve years ago; I suppose then
your real husband was living, for nothing else could tally with your
condescension to me in everything except marriage. Since that time, your
refusing to come to Holland in the vessel I had provided for you, under
a distant prospect of your being with child, though in reality it was
your having a child too much, as the captain told me of, when I, being
ignorant of the case, did not understand him. Now," continued he, "she
says that you are the identical Lady Roxana which made so much noise in
the world, and has even described the robe and head-dress you wore on
that occasion, and in that I know she is right; for, to my own
knowledge, you have that very dress by you now; I having seen you
dressed in it at our lodging at the Quaker's. From all these
circumstances," says he, "I may be assured that you have imposed grossly
upon me, and instead of being a woman of honour as I took you for, I
find that you have been an abandoned wretch, and had nothing to
recommend you but a sum of money and a fair countenance, joined to a
false unrelenting heart."

These words of my lord's struck such a damp upon my spirits, as made me
unable to speak in my turn. But at last, I spoke as follows: "My lord, I
have most patiently stood to hear all it was possible for you to allege
against me, which has no other proof than imagination. That I was the
wife of a brewer, I have no reason now to deny, neither had I any
occasion before to acknowledge it. I brought him a handsome fortune,
which, joined to his, made us appear in a light far superior to our
neighbours. I had also five children by him, two sons and three
daughters, and had my husband been as wise as rich, we might have lived
happily together now. But it was not so, for he minded nothing but
sporting, in almost every branch; and closely following of it soon run
out all his substance, and then left me in an unhappy, helpless
condition. I did not send my children to my relations till the greatest
necessity drove me, and after that, hearing my husband was dead, I
married the jeweller, who was afterwards murdered. If I had owned how
many children I had, the jeweller would not have married me, and the way
of life I was in would not keep my family, so I was forced to deny them
in order to get them bread. Neither can I say that I have either heard
or known anything of my children since, excepting that I heard they were
all taken care of; and this was the very reason I would not marry you,
when you offered it some years since, for these children lay seriously
at my heart, and as I did not want money, my inclination was to come to
England, and not entail five children upon you the day of marriage."

"Pray, madam," said my lord, interrupting me, "I do not find that you
kept up to your resolutions when you got there; you were so far from
doing your duty as a parent, that you even neglected the civility of
acquaintances, for they would have asked after them, but your whole
scheme has been to conceal yourself as much as possible, and even when
you were found out, denied yourself, as witness the case of your
daughter here. As to the character of Lady Roxana, which you so nicely
managed," said he, "did that become a woman that had five children,
whose necessity had obliged you to leave them, to live in a continual
scene of pageantry and riot, I could almost say debauchery? Look into
your conduct, and see if you deserve to have the title or the estate you
now so happily enjoy."

After this speech, he walked about the room in a confused manner for
some minutes, and then addressed himself to Amy. "Pray, Mrs. Amy," says
he, "give me your judgment in this case, for although I know you are as
much as possible in your lady's interest, yet I cannot think you have so
little charity as to think she acted like a woman of worth and
discretion. Do you really think, as you knew all of them from infants,
that this young woman is your lady's daughter?"

Amy, who always had spirits enough about her, said at once she believed
the girl was my daughter. "And truly," says she, "I think your man
Thomas is her eldest son, for the tale he tells of his birth and
education suits exactly with our then circumstances."

"Why, indeed," said my lord, "I believe so too, for I now recollect that
when we first took him into our service at Dover, he told me he was the
son of a brewer in London; that his father had run away from his mother,
and left her in a distressed condition with five children, of which he
was second child, or eldest son."

Thomas was then called into the parlour, and asked what he knew of his
family; he repeated all as above, concerning his father's running away
and leaving me; but said that he had often asked and inquired after
them, but without any success, and concluded, that he believed his
brothers and sisters were distributed in several places, and that his
mother died in the greatest distress, and was buried by the parish.

"Indeed," said my lord, "it is my opinion that Thomas is one of your
sons; do not you think the same?" addressing himself to me.

"From the circumstances that have been related, my lord," said I, "I now
believe that these are both my children; but you would have thought me a
mad woman to have countenanced and taken this young woman in as my
child, without a thorough assurance of it; for that would have been
running myself to a certain expense and trouble, without the least
glimpse of real satisfaction."

"Pray," said my lord to my daughter, "let me know what is become of
your brothers and sisters; give me the best account of them that you
can."

"My lord," replied she, "agreeably to your commands, I will inform you
to the best of my knowledge; and to begin with myself, who am the eldest
of the five. I was put to a sister of my father's with my youngest
brother, who, by mere dint of industry, gave us maintenance and
education, suitable to her circumstances; and she, with my uncle's
consent, let me go to service when I was advanced in years; and among
the variety of places I lived at, Lady Roxana's was one."

"Yes," said Thomas, "I knew her there, when I was a valet at my Lord
D----'s, the next door; it was there I became acquainted with her; and
she, by the consent of the gentlewoman," pointing to Amy, "let me see
the Lady Roxana's fine vestment, which she danced in at the grand ball."

"Well," continued my daughter, "after I left this place, I was at
several others before I became acquainted with Mrs. Amy a second time (I
knew her before as Roxana's woman), who told me one day some things
relating to my mother, and from thence I concluded if she was not my
mother herself (as I at first thought she was), she must be employed by
her; for no stranger could profess so much friendship, where there was
no likelihood of any return, after being so many years asunder.

"After this, I made it my business to find your lady out if possible,
and was twice in her company, once on board the ship you were to have
come to Holland in, and once at the Quaker's house in the Minories,
London; but as I gave her broad hints of whom I took her for, and my
lady did not think proper to own me, I began to think I was mistaken,
till your voyage to Holland was put off. Soon after, I was flung into
Whitechapel jail for a false debt, but, through the recommendation of
the jailer's wife to the annual charity of the good Lady Roberts, of
Mile End, I was discharged. Whereupon I posted away, seeking my mother
all down the Kent Road as far as Dover and Deal, at which last place not
finding her, I came in a coaster to London, and landing in Southwark,
was immediately arrested, and confined in the Marshalsea prison, where I
remained some time, deprived of every means to let any person without
the prison know my deplorable state and condition, till my chum, a young
woman, my bedfellow, who was also confined for debt, was, by a
gentleman, discharged. This young woman of her own free will, went, my
lord, to your lodgings in the Minories, and acquainted your landlady,
the Quaker, where I was, and for what sum I was confined, who
immediately sent and paid the pretended debt, and so I was a second time
discharged. Upon which, going to the Quaker's to return her my thanks
soon after a letter from your lady to her, with a direction in it where
to find you, falling into my hands, I set out the next morning for the
Hague; and I humbly hope your pardon, my lord, for the liberty I have
taken; and you may be assured, that whatever circumstances of life I
happen to be in, I will be no disgrace to your lordship or family."

"Well," said my husband, "what can you say of your mother's second
child, who, I hear, was a son?"

"My lord," said I, "it is in my power to tell you, that Thomas there is
the son you mention; their circumstances are the same, with this
difference, that she was brought up under the care of a good aunt, and
the boy forced to run away from a bad one, and shift for his bread ever
since; so if she is my daughter, he is my son, and to oblige you, my
lord, I own her, and to please myself I will own him, and they two are
brother and sister." I had no sooner done speaking, than Thomas fell
down before me, and asked my blessing, after which, he addressed himself
to my lord as follows:

"My lord," said he, "out of your abundant goodness you took me into your
service at Dover. I told you then the circumstances I was in, which will
save your lordship much time by preventing a repetition; but, if your
lordship pleases, it shall be carefully penned down, for such a variety
of incidents has happened to me in England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland,
Holland, France, and the Isle of Man, in which I have travelled for
about eighteen years past, as may prove an agreeable amusement to you,
when you are cloyed with better company; for as I have never been
anything above a common servant, so my stories shall only consist of
facts, and such as are seldom to be met with, as they are all in low
life."

"Well, Thomas," said my lord, "take your own time to do it, and I will
reward you for your trouble."

"Now, madam," said my lord to my daughter, "if you please to proceed."
"My lord," continued she, "my mother's third child, which was a
daughter, lived with the relation I did, and got a place to wait upon a
young lady whose father and mother were going to settle at Boulogne, in
France; she went with them, and having stayed at this gentleman's (who
was a French merchant) two years, was married to a man with the consent
of the family she lived in; and her master, by way of fortune, got him
to be master of a French and Holland coaster, and this was the very
person whose ship you hired to come to Holland in; the captain's wife
was my own sister, consequently my lady's second daughter; as to my
youngest sister, she lived with the uncle and aunt Thomas ran away from,
and died of the smallpox soon after. My youngest brother was put out
apprentice to a carpenter, where he improved in his business, till a
gentlewoman came to his master and mistress (which I take by the
description they gave me, to be Mrs. Amy), who had him put out to an
education fit for a merchant, and then sent him to the Indies, where he
is now settled, and in a fair way to get a large estate. This, my lord,
is the whole account I can at present give of them, and although it may
seem very strange, I assure you, it is all the just truth."

When she had finished her discourse, my lord turned to me, and said,
that since I that was her mother had neglected doing my duty, though
sought so much after, he would take it upon himself to see both the girl
and Thomas provided for, without any advising or letting me know
anything about them; and added, with a malicious sneer, "I must take
care of the child I have had by you too, or it will have but an
indifferent parent to trust to in case of my decease."

This finished the discourse, and my lord withdrew into his study, in a
humour that I am unable to describe, and left me, Amy, Thomas, and my
daughter Susanna, as I must now call her, in the parlour together. We
sat staring at each other some time, till at last Amy said, "I suppose,
my lady, you have no farther business with your new daughter; she has
told her story, and may now dispose of herself to the best advantage she
can." "No," said I, "I have nothing to say to her, only that she shall
never be admitted into my presence again." The poor girl burst out into
tears, and said, "Pray, my lady, excuse me, for I am certain that were
you in my circumstances, you would have done the very action I have, and
would expect a pardon for committing the offence."

After this, I said to Thomas, "Keep what has been said to yourself, and
I shall speak to you by-and-by;" and then I withdrew, and went upstairs
to my closet, leaving Amy with Susanna, who soon dismissed her, and
followed me.

When Amy came to me, "Now, my lady," says she, "what do you think of
this morning's work? I believe my lord is not so angry as we were
fearful of." "You are mistaken in your lord, Amy," said I, "and are not
so well acquainted with the deep and premeditated revenge of Dutchmen as
I am, and although it may not be my husband's temper, yet I dread it as
much, but shall see more at dinner time."

Soon after this, my husband called Thomas, and bid him order the cloth
for his dinner to be laid in his study, and bid him tell his mother that
he would dine by himself. When I heard this, I was more shocked than I
had been yet. "Now his anger begins to work, Amy," said I, "how must I
act?" "I do not know," answered she, "but I will go into the study, and
try what can be done, and, as a faithful mediator, will try to bring you
together." She was not long before she returned, and bursting into
tears, "I know not what to do," says she, "for your husband is in a deep
study, and when I told him you desired him to dine with you in the
parlour as usual, he only said, 'Mrs. Amy, go to your lady, tell her to
dine when and where she pleases, and pray obey her as your lady; but let
her know from me that she has lost the tenderness I had for her as a
wife, by the little thought she had of her children.'"

Nothing could have shocked me more than the delivery of this message by
Amy. I, almost bathed in tears, went to him myself; found him in a
melancholy posture reading in Milton's "Paradise Regained." He looked at
me very sternly when I entered his study, told me he had nothing to say
to me at that time, and if I had a mind not to disturb him, I must leave
him for the present. "My lord," said I, "supposing all that has been
said by this girl was truth, what reason have you to be in this
unforgiving humour? What have I done to you to deserve this usage? Have
you found any fault with me since I had the happiness of being married
to you? Did you ever find me in any company that you did not approve of?
Have you any reason to think that I have wasted any of your substance?
If you have none of these things to allege against me, for heaven's sake
do not let us now make our lives unhappy, for my having had legitimate
children by a lawful husband, at a time that you think it no crime to
have had a natural son by me, which I had the most reason to repent of."

I spoke the latter part of these words with a small air of authority,
that he might think me the less guilty; but, I believe, he only looked
on what I had said as a piece of heroism; for he soon after delivered
himself in the following speech: "Madam, do you not think that you have
used me in a very deceitful manner? If you think that I have not had
that usage, I will, in a few words, prove the contrary. When first I
knew you, soon after the jeweller's death at Paris, you never mentioned,
in all that intricate affair I was engaged in for you, so much as your
having any children; that, as your circumstances then were, could have
done you no harm, but, on the contrary, it would have moved the
compassion of your bitter enemy the Jew, if he had any. Afterwards, when
I first saw you in London, and began to treat with you about marriage,
your children, which, to all prudent women, are the first things
provided for, were so far neglected as not to be spoken of, though mine
were mentioned to you; and as our fortunes were very considerable, yours
might very well have been put into the opposite scale with them. Another
great piece of your injustice was when I offered to settle your own
fortune upon yourself, you would not consent to it; I do not look on
that piece of condescension out of love to me, but a thorough hatred you
had to your own flesh and blood; and lastly, your not owning your
daughter, though she strongly hinted who she was to you when she was
twice in your company, and even followed you from place to place while
you were in England. Now, if you can reconcile this piece of inhumanity
with yourself, pray try what you can say to me about your never telling
me the life you led in Pall Mall, in the character of Roxana? You
scrupled to be happily married to me, and soon after came to England,
and was a reputed whore to any nobleman that would come up to your
price, and lived with one a considerable time, and was taken by several
people to be his lawful wife. If any gentleman should ask me what I have
taken to my bed, what must I answer? I must say an inhuman false-hearted
whore, one that had not tenderness enough to own her own children, and
has too little virtue, in my mind, to make a good wife.

"I own I would," says he, "have settled your own estate upon you with
great satisfaction, but I will not do it now; you may retire to your
chamber, and when I have any occasion to speak with you, I will send a
messenger to you; so, my undeserving lady countess, you may walk out of
the room."

I was going to reply to all this, but instead of hearing me, he began to
speak against the Quaker, who, he supposed, knew all the intrigues of my
life; but I cleared her innocence, by solemnly declaring it was a
thorough reformation of my past life that carried me to live at the
Quaker's house, who knew nothing of me before I went to live with her,
and that she was, I believed, a virtuous woman.

I went away prodigiously chagrined. I knew not what course to take; I
found expostulation signified nothing, and all my hopes depended on what
I might say to him after we were gone to bed at night. I sent in for
Amy, and having told her our discourse, she said she knew not what to
think of him, but hoped it would, by great submission, wear off by
degrees. I could eat but little dinner, and Amy was more sorrowful than
hungry, and after we had dined, we walked by ourselves in the garden,
to know what we had best pursue. As we were walking about, Thomas came
to us, and told us that the young woman who had caused all the words,
had been at the door, and delivered a letter to my lord's footman, who
had carried it upstairs, and that she was ordered to go to his lordship
in his study, which struck me with a fresh and sensible grief. I told
Thomas, as he was to be her brother, to learn what my lord had said to
her, if he could, as she came down; on which he went into the house to
obey his order.

He was not gone in above a quarter of an hour before he came to me
again, and told me she was gone, and that my lord had given her a purse
of twenty guineas, with orders to live retired, let nobody know who or
what she was, and come to him again in about a month's time. I was very
much satisfied to hear this, and was in hopes of its proving a happy
omen; and I was better pleased about two hours after, when Thomas came
to me to let me know that my lord had given him thirty guineas, and bid
him take off his livery, and new clothe himself, for he intended to make
him his first clerk, and put him in the way of making his fortune. I now
thought it was impossible for me to be poor, and was inwardly rejoiced
that my children (meaning Thomas and Susanna) were in the high road to
grow rich.

As Amy and I had dined by ourselves, my lord kept his study all the day,
and at night, after supper, Isabel came and told me that my lord's man
had received orders to make his bed in the crimson room, which name it
received from the colour of the bed and furniture, and was reserved
against the coming of strangers, or sickness. When she had delivered her
message she withdrew, and I told Amy it would be to no purpose to go to
him again, but I would have her lie in a small bed, which I ordered
immediately to be carried into my chamber. Before we went to bed, I went
to his lordship to know why he would make us both look so little among
our own servants, as to part, bed and board, so suddenly. He only said,
"My Lady Roxana knows the airs of quality too well to be informed that a
scandal among nobility does not consist in parting of beds; if you
cannot lie by yourself, you may send a letter to my Lord ----, whom you
lived with as a mistress in London; perhaps he may want a bedfellow as
well as you, and come to you at once; you are too well acquainted with
him to stand upon ceremony."

I left him, with my heart full of malice, grief, shame, and revenge. I
did not want a good will to do any mischief; but I wanted an unlimited
power to put all my wicked thoughts in execution.

Amy and I lay in our chamber, and the next morning at breakfast we were
talking of what the servants (for there were thirteen of them in all,
viz., two coachmen, four footmen, a groom, and postillion, two women
cooks, two housemaids, and a laundry-maid, besides Isabel, who was my
waiting-maid, and Amy, who acted as housekeeper) could say of the
disturbance that was in the family. "Pho!" said Amy, "never trouble your
head about that, for family quarrels are so common in noblemen's houses,
both here and in England, that there are more families parted, both in
bed and board, than live lovingly together. It can be no surprise to the
servants, and if your neighbours should hear it, they will only think
you are imitating the air of nobility, and have more of that blood in
you than you appeared to have when you and your lord lived happily
together."

The time, I own, went very sluggishly on. I had no company but Amy and
Isabel, and it was given out among the servants of noblemen and gentry
that I was very much indisposed, for I thought it a very improper time
either to receive or pay visits.

In this manner I lived till the month was up that my daughter was to
come again to my lord, for although I went morning, noon, and night,
into his apartment to see him, I seldom had a quarter of an hour's
discourse with him, and oftentimes one of his valets would be sent to
tell me his lord was busy, a little before the time I usually went,
which I found was to prevent my going in to him, but this was only when
he was in an ill humour, as his man called it.

Whether my lord used to make himself uneasy for want of mine or other
company, I cannot tell, but the servants complained every day, as I
heard by Amy, that his lordship ate little or nothing, and would
sometimes shed tears when he sat down by himself to breakfast, dinner,
or supper; and, indeed, I began to think that he looked very thin, his
countenance grew pale, and that he had every other sign of a grieved or
broken heart.

My daughter came to him one Monday morning, and stayed with him in his
study near two hours. I wondered at the reason of it, but could guess at
nothing certain; and at last she went away, but I fixed myself so as to
see her as she passed by me, and she appeared to have a countenance full
of satisfaction.

In the evening, when I went in as usual, he spoke to me in a freer style
than he had done since our breach. "Well, madam" (for he had not used
the words "my lady" at any time after my daughter's coming to our
house), said he, "I think I have provided for your daughter." "As how,
my lord, pray will you let me know?" said I. "Yes," replied he, "as I
have reason to think you will be sorry to hear of her welfare in any
shape, I will tell you. A gentleman who is going factor for the Dutch
East India Company, on the coast of Malabar, I have recommended her to;
and he, on my character and promise of a good fortune, will marry her
very soon, for the Company's ships sail in about twelve days; so, in a
fortnight, like a great many mothers as there are nowadays, you may
rejoice at having got rid of one of your children, though you neither
know where, how, or to whom."

Although I was very glad my lord spoke to me at all, and more especially
so at my daughter's going to be married, and settling in the Indies, yet
his words left so sharp a sting behind them as was exceeding troublesome
to me to wear off. I did not dare venture to make any further inquiries,
but was very glad of what I heard, and soon bidding my lord goodnight,
went and found Amy, who was reading a play in the chamber.

I waited with the greatest impatience for this marriage; and when I
found the day was fixed, I made bold to ask my lord if I should not be
present in his chamber when the ceremony was performed. This favor was
also denied me. I then asked my lord's chaplain to speak to him on that
head, but he was deaf to his importunities, and bade him tell me that I
very well knew his mind. The wedding was performed on a Wednesday
evening, in my lord's presence, and he permitted nobody to be there but
a sister of the bridegroom's, and Thomas (now my lord's secretary or
chief clerk), who was brother to the bride, and who gave her away. They
all supped together after the ceremony was over in the great
dining-room, where the fortune was paid, which was £2000 (as I heard
from Thomas afterwards), and the bonds for the performance of the
marriage were redelivered.

Next morning my lord asked me if I was willing to see my daughter before
she sailed to the Indies. "My lord," said I, "as the seeing of her was
the occasion of this great breach that has happened between us, so if
your lordship will let me have a sight of her and a reconciliation with
you at the same time, there is nothing can be more desirable to me, or
would more contribute to my happiness during the rest of my life."

"No, madam," says he, "I would have you see your daughter, to be
reconciled to her, and give her your blessing (if a blessing can proceed
from you) at parting; but our reconciliation will never be completed
till one of us comes near the verge of life, if then; for I am a man
that am never reconciled without ample amends, which is a thing that is
not in your power to give, without you can alter the course of nature
and recall time."

On hearing him declare himself so open, I told him that my curse instead
of my blessing would pursue my daughter for being the author of all the
mischiefs that had happened between us. "No, madam," said he, "if you
had looked upon her as a daughter heretofore, I should have had no
occasion to have had any breach with you. The whole fault lies at your
own door; for whatever your griefs may inwardly be, I would have you
recollect they were of your own choosing."

I found I was going to give way to a very violent passion, which would
perhaps be the worse for me, so I left the room and went up to my own
chamber, not without venting bitter reproaches both against my daughter
and her unknown husband.

However, the day she was to go on shipboard, she breakfasted with my
lord, and as soon as it was over, and my lord was gone into his study to
fetch something out, I followed him there, and asked him if he would
give me leave to present a gold repeating watch to my daughter before
she went away. I thought he seemed somewhat pleased with this piece of
condescension in me, though it was done more to gain his goodwill than
to express any value I had for her. He told me that he did not know who
I could better make such a present to, and I might give it to her if I
pleased. Accordingly I went and got it out of my cabinet in a moment,
and bringing it to my lord, desired he would give it her from me. He
asked me if I would not give it her myself. I told him no; I wished her
very well, but had nothing to say to her till I was restored to his
lordship's bed and board.

About two hours after all this, the coach was ordered to the door, and
my daughter and her new husband, the husband's sister, and my son
Thomas, all went into it, in order to go to the house of a rich uncle of
the bridegroom's, where they were to dine before they went on board, and
my lord went there in a sedan about an hour after. And having eaten
their dinner, which on this occasion was the most elegant, they all went
on board the Indiaman, where my lord and my son Thomas stayed till the
ship's crew was hauling in their anchors to sail, and then came home
together in the coach, and it being late in the evening, he told Thomas
he should sup with him that night, after which they went to bed in
their several apartments.

Next morning when I went to see my lord as usual, he told me that as he
had handsomely provided for my daughter, and sent her to the Indies with
a man of merit and fortune, he sincerely wished her great prosperity.
"And," he added, "to let you see, madam, that I should never have parted
from my first engagements of love to you, had you not laid yourself so
open to censure for your misconduct, my next care shall be to provide
for your son Thomas in a handsome manner, before I concern myself with
my son by you."

This was the subject of our discourse, with which I was very well
pleased. I only wished my daughter had been married and sent to the
Indies before I had married myself; but I began to hope that the worst
would be over when Thomas was provided for too, and the son my lord had
by me, who was now at the university, was at home; which I would have
brought to pass could my will be obeyed, but I was not to enjoy that
happiness.

My lord and I lived with a secret discontent of each other for near a
twelvemonth before I saw any provision made for my son Thomas, and then
I found my lord bought him a very large plantation in Virginia, and was
furnishing him to go there in a handsome manner; he also gave him four
quarter parts in four large trading West India vessels, in which he
boarded a great quantity of merchandise to traffic with when he came to
the end of his journey, so that he was a very rich man before he (what
we call) came into the world.

The last article that was to be managed, was to engage my son to a wife
before he left Holland; and it happened that the gentleman who was the
seller of the plantation my husband bought, had been a Virginia planter
in that colony a great many years; but his life growing on the decline,
and his health very dubious, he had come to Holland with an intent to
sell his plantation, and then had resolved to send for his wife, son,
and daughter, to come to him with the return of the next ships. This
gentleman had brought over with him the pictures of all his family,
which he was showing to my lord at the same time he was paying for the
effects; and on seeing the daughter's picture, which appeared to him
very beautiful, my lord inquired if she was married. "No, my lord," says
the planter, "but I believe I shall dispose of her soon after she comes
to me." "How old is your daughter?" said my lord. "Why, my lord,"
replied the planter, "she is twenty-two years of age." Then my lord
asked my son if he should like that young lady for a wife. "Nothing, my
lord," said Thomas, "could lay a greater obligation upon me than your
lordship's providing me with a wife."

"Now, sir," said my lord to the planter, "what do you say to a match
between this young gentleman and your daughter? Their ages are
agreeable, and if you can, or will, give her more fortune than he has,
his shall be augmented. You partly know his substance, by the money I
have now paid you."

This generous proposal of my lord's pleased the planter to a great
degree, and he declared to my lord that he thought nothing could be a
greater favour done him, for two reasons; one of which was, that he was
certain the young gentleman was as good as he appeared, because he had
taken for his plantation so large a sum of money as none but a gentleman
could pay. The next reason was, that this marriage, to be performed as
soon as my son arrived there, would be a great satisfaction to his wife,
whose favourite the daughter was. "For," added he, "my wife will not
only have the pleasure of seeing her daughter settled on what was our
own hereditary estate, but also see her married to a man of substance,
without the danger of crossing the seas to be matched to a person equal
to herself."

"Pray, sir," said my lord, "let me hear what fortune you are willing to
give with your daughter; you have but two children, and I know you must
be rich." "Why, my lord," replied the planter, "there is no denying
that; but you must remember I have a son as well as a daughter to
provide for, and he I intend to turn into the mercantile way as soon as
he arrives safe from Virginia. I have, my lord," continued he, "a very
large stock-in-trade there, as warehouses of tobacco, &c., lodged in the
custom-houses of the ports, to the value of £7000, to which I will add
£3000 in money, and I hope you will look upon that as a very competent
estate; and when the young gentleman's fortune is joined to that, I
believe he will be the richest man in the whole American colonies of his
age."

It was then considered between my lord and Thomas, that no woman with a
quarter of that fortune would venture herself over to the West Indies
with a man that had ten times as much; so it being hinted to the planter
that my lord had agreed to the proposals, they promised to meet the next
morning to settle the affair.

In the evening, my lord, with Thomas in his company, hinted the above
discourse to me. I was frightened almost out of my wits to think what a
large sum of money had been laid out for my son, but kept what I thought
to myself. It was agreed that my son was to marry the old planter's
daughter, and a lawyer was sent for, with instructions to draw up all
the writings for the marriage-settlement, &c., and the next morning a
messenger came from the planter with a note to my lord, letting him
know, if it was not inconvenient, he would wait on his lordship to
breakfast. He came soon after with a Dutch merchant of great estate, who
was our neighbour at The Hague, where they settled every point in
question, and the articles were all drawn up and signed by the several
parties the next day before dinner.

There was nothing now remaining but my son's departure to his new
plantation in Virginia. Great despatch was made that he might be ready
to sail in one of his own ships, and take the advantage of an English
convoy, which was almost ready to sail. My lord sent several valuable
presents to my son's lady, as did her father; and as I was at liberty in
this case to do as I would, and knowing my lord had a very great value
for my son, I thought that the richer my presents were, the more he
would esteem me (but there was nothing in it, the enmity he took against
me had taken root in his heart); so I sent her a curious set of china,
the very best I could buy, with a silver tea-kettle and lamp, tea-pot,
sugar-dish, cream-pot, teaspoons, &c., and as my lord had sent a golden
repeater, I added to it a golden equipage, with my lord's picture
hanging to it, finely painted; (This was another thing I did purposely
to please him, but it would not do.) A few days after, he came to take
his leave of me, by my lord's order, and at my parting with him I shed
abundance of tears, to think I was then in an almost strange place, no
child that could then come near me, and under so severe a displeasure of
my lord, that I had very little hopes of ever being friends with him
again.

My life did not mend after my son was gone; all I could do would not
persuade my lord to have any free conversation with me. And at this
juncture it was that the foolish jade Amy, who was now advanced in
years, was catched in a conversation with one of my lord's men, which
was not to her credit; for, it coming to his ears, she was turned out of
the house by my lord's orders, and was never suffered to come into it
again during his lifetime, and I did not dare to speak a word in her
favour for fear he should retort upon me, "Like mistress, like maid."

I could hear nothing of Amy for the first three months after she had
left me, till one day, as I was looking out of a dining-room window, I
saw her pass by, but I did not dare ask her to come in, for fear my lord
should hear of her being there, which would have been adding fuel to the
fire; however, she, looking up at the house, saw me. I made a motion to
her to stay a little about the door, and in the meantime I wrote a note,
and dropped it out of the window, in which I told her how I had lived in
her absence, and desired her to write me a letter, and carry it the next
day to my sempstress's house, who would take care to deliver it to me
herself.

I told Isabel that she should let me know when the milliner came again,
for I had some complaints to her about getting up my best suit of
Brussels lace nightclothes. On the Saturday following, just after I had
dined, Isabel came into my apartment. "My lady," says she, "the milliner
is in the parlour; will you be pleased to have her sent upstairs, or
will your ladyship be pleased to go down to her?" "Why, send her up,
Isabel," said I, "she is as able to come to me as I am to go to her; I
will see her here."

When the milliner came into my chamber, I sent Isabel to my
dressing-room to fetch a small parcel of fine linen which lay there, and
in the interim she gave me Amy's letter, which I put into my pocket,
and, having pretended to be angry about my linen, I gave her the small
bundle Isabel brought, and bid her be sure to do them better for the
future.

She promised me she would, and went about her business; and when she was
gone, I opened Amy's letter, and having read it, found it was to the
following purpose, viz., that she had opened a coffee-house, and
furnished the upper part of it to let out in lodgings; that she kept two
maids and a man, but that the trade of it did not answer as she had
reason to expect; she was willing to leave it off, and retire into the
country to settle for the rest of her life, but was continually harassed
by such disturbance in her conscience as made her unfit to resolve upon
anything, and wished there was a possibility for her to see me, that she
might open her mind with the same freedom as formerly, and have my
advice upon some particular affairs; and such-like discourse.

It was a pretty while before I heard from Amy again, and when I did, the
letter was in much the same strain as the former, excepting that things
were coming more to a crisis; for she told me in it that her money was
so out, that is, lent as ready money to traders, and trusted for liquors
in her house, that if she did not go away this quarter, she should be
obliged to run away the next. I very much lamented her unfortunate case,
but that could be no assistance to her, as I had it not now in my power
to see her when I would, or give her what I pleased, as it had always
used to be; so all I could do was to wish her well, and leave her to
take care of herself.

About this time it was that I perceived my lord began to look very pale
and meagre, and I had a notion he was going into a consumption, but did
not dare tell him so, for fear he should say I was daily looking for his
death, and was now overjoyed that I saw a shadow of it; nevertheless, he
soon after began to find himself in a very bad state of health, for he
said to me one morning, that my care would not last long, for he
believed he was seized by a distemper it was impossible for him to get
over. "My lord," said I, "you do not do me justice in imagining anything
concerning me that does not tend to your own happiness, for if your body
is out of order, my mind suffers for it." Indeed, had he died then,
without making a will, it might have been well for me; but he was not so
near death as that; and, what was worse, the distemper, which proved a
consumption (which was occasioned chiefly by much study, watchings,
melancholy thoughts, wilful and obstinate neglect of taking care of his
body, and such like things), held him nine weeks and three days after
this, before it carried him off.

He now took country lodgings, most delightfully situated both for air
and prospect, and had a maid and man to attend him. I begged on my knees
to go with him, but could not get that favour granted; for, if I could,
it might have been the means of restoring me to his favour, but our
breach was too wide to be thoroughly reconciled, though I used all the
endearing ways I had ever had occasion for to creep into his favour.

Before he went out of town he locked and sealed up every room in the
house, excepting my bedchamber, dressing-room, one parlour, and all the
offices and rooms belonging to the servants; and, as he had now all my
substance in his power, I was in a very poor state for a countess, and
began to wish, with great sincerity, that I had never seen him, after I
had lived so happy a life as I did at the Quaker's. For notwithstanding
our estates joined together, when we were first married, amounted to
£3376 per annum, and near £18,000 ready money, besides jewels, plate,
goods, &c., of a considerable value, yet we had lived in a very high
manner since our taking the title of earl and countess upon us; setting
up a great house, and had a number of servants; our equipage, such as
coach, chariot, horses, and their attendants; a handsome fortune my lord
had given to my daughter, and a very noble one to my son, whom he loved
very well, not for his being my son, but for the courteous behaviour of
him in never aspiring to anything above a valet after he knew who he
was, till my lord made him his secretary or clerk. Besides all these
expenses, my lord, having flung himself into the trade to the Indies,
both East and West, had sustained many great and uncommon losses,
occasioned by his merchandise being mostly shipped in English bottoms;
and that nation having declared war against the crown of Spain, he was
one of the first and greatest sufferers by that power; so that, on the
whole, our estate, which was as above, dwindled to about £1000 per
annum, and our home stock, viz., about £17,000, was entirely gone. This,
I believe, was another great mortification to his lordship, and one of
the main things that did help to hasten his end; for he was observed,
both by me and all his servants, to be more cast down at hearing of his
losses, that were almost daily sent to him, than he was at what had
happened between him and me.

Nothing could give more uneasiness than the damage our estate sustained
by this traffic. He looked upon it as a mere misfortune that no person
could avoid; but I, besides that, thought it was a judgment upon me, to
punish me in the loss of all my ill-got gain. But when I found that his
own fortune began to dwindle as well as mine, I was almost ready to
think it was possible his lordship might have been as wicked a liver as
I had, and the same vengeance as had been poured upon me for my repeated
crimes might also be a punishment for him.

As his lordship was in a bad state of health, and had removed to a
country lodging, his study and counting-house, as well as his other
rooms, were locked and sealed up; all business was laid aside, excepting
such letters as came to him were carried to his lordship to be opened,
read, and answered. I also went to see him morning and evening, but he
would not suffer me to stay with him a single night. I might have had
another room in the same house, but was not willing the people who kept
it should know that there was a misunderstanding between us; so I
contented myself to be a constant visitor, but could not persuade him to
forgive me the denying of my daughter, and acting the part of Roxana,
because I had kept those two things an inviolable secret from him and
everybody else but Amy, and it was carelessness in her conduct at last
that was the foundation of all my future misery.

As my lord's weakness increased, so his ill temper, rather than
diminish, increased also. I could do nothing to please him, and began to
think that he was only pettish because he found it was his turn to go
out of the world first. A gentleman that lived near him, as well as his
chaplain, persuaded him to have a physician, to know in what state his
health was; and by all I could learn, the doctor told him to settle his
worldly affairs as soon as he conveniently could. "For," says he,
"although your death is not certain, still your life is very
precarious."

The first thing he did after this was to send for the son he had by me
from the university. He came the week afterwards, and the tutor with
him, to take care of his pupil. The next day after my lord came home,
and sending for six eminent men that lived at The Hague he made his
will, and signed it in the presence of them all; and they, with the
chaplain, were appointed the executors of it, and guardians of my son.

As I was in a great concern at his making his will unknown to me, and
before we were friends, I thought of it in too serious a manner not to
speak about it. I did not know where to apply first, but after mature
consideration sent for the chaplain, and he coming to me, I desired he
would give me the best intelligence he could about it. "My lady," said
he, "you cannot be so unacquainted with the duty of my function, and the
trust my lord has reposed in me, but you must know I shall go beyond my
trust in relating anything of that nature to you; all that I can say on
that head is, that I would have you make friends with my lord as soon as
you possibly can, and get him to make another will, or else take the
best care of yourself as lies in your power; for, I assure you, if his
lordship dies, you are but poorly provided for."

These last words of the chaplain's most terribly alarmed me. I knew not
what to do; and, at last, as if I was to be guided by nothing but the
furies, I went to his chamber, and after inquiring how he did, and
hearing that he was far from well, I told him I had heard he had made
his will. "Yes," said he, "I have; and what then?" "Why, my lord,"
replied I, "I thought it would not have been derogatory to both our
honours for you to have mentioned it to me before you did it, and have
let me known in what manner you intended to settle your estate. This
would have been but acting like a man to his wife, even if you had
married me without a fortune; but as you received so handsomely with me,
you ought to have considered it as my substance, as well as your own,
that you were going to dispose of."

My lord looked somewhat staggered at what I had said, and pausing a
little while, answered, that he thought, and also looked upon it as a
granted opinion, that after a man married a woman, all that she was in
possession of was his, excepting he had made a prior writing or
settlement to her of any part or all she was then possessed of.
"Besides, my lady," added he, "I have married both your children, and
given them very noble fortunes, especially your son. I have also had
great losses in trade, both by sea and land, since you delivered your
fortune to me, and even at this time, notwithstanding the appearance we
make in the world, I am not worth a third of what I was when we came to
settle in Holland; and then, here is our own son shall be provided for
in a handsome manner by me; for I am thoroughly convinced there will be
but little care taken of him if I leave anything in your power for that
purpose: witness Thomas and Susanna."

"My lord," said I, "I am not come into your chamber to know what care
you have taken of our child. I do not doubt but you have acted like a
father by it. What I would be informed in is, what I am to depend upon
in case of your decease; which I, however, hope may be a great many
years off yet." "You need not concern yourself about that," said he;
"your son will take care that you shall not want; but yet, I will tell
you, too," said he, "that it may prevent your wishing for my death. I
have, in my will, left all I am possessed of in the world to my son,
excepting £1500; out of that there is £500 for you, £500 among my
executors, and the other £500 is to bury me, pay my funeral expenses,
and what is overplus I have ordered to be equally divided among my
servants."

When I had heard him pronounce these words, I stared like one that was
frightened out of his senses. "Five hundred pounds for me!" says I;
"pray, what do you mean? What! am I, that brought you so handsome a
fortune, to be under the curb of my son, and ask him for every penny I
want? No, sir," said I, "I will not accept it. I expect to be left in
full possession of one-half of your fortune, that I may live the
remainder of my life like your wife." "Madam," replied my lord, "you may
expect what you please. If you can make it appear since I found you out
to be a jilt that I have looked upon you as my wife, everything shall be
altered and settled just as you desire, which might then be called your
will; but as the case now stands, the will is mine, and so it shall
remain."

I thought I should have sunk when I had heard him make this solemn and
premeditated declaration. I raved like a mad woman, and, at the end of
my discourse, told him that I did not value what could happen to me,
even if I was forced to beg my bread, for I would stand the test of my
own character; and as I could get nothing by being an honest woman, so
I should not scruple to declare that "the son you have left what you
have to is a bastard you had by me several years before we were
married."

"Oh," says he, "madam, do you think you can frighten me? no, not in the
least; for if you ever mention anything of it, the title, as well as all
the estate, will go to another branch of my family, and you will then be
left to starve in good earnest, without having the least glimpse of hope
to better your fortune; for," added he, "it is not very probable that
you will be courted for a wife by any man of substance at these years;
so if you have a mind to make yourself easy in your present
circumstances, you must rest contented with what I have left you, and
not prove yourself a whore to ruin your child, in whose power it will be
to provide for you in a handsome manner, provided you behave yourself
with that respect to him and me as you ought to do; for if any words
arise about what I have done, I shall make a fresh will, and, as the
laws of this nation will give me liberty, cut you off with a shilling."

My own unhappiness, and his strong and lasting resentment, had kept me
at high words, and flowing in tears, for some time; and as I was
unwilling anybody should see me in that unhappy condition, I stayed
coolly talking to him, till our son, who had been to several gentlemen's
houses about my lord's business, came home to tell his father the
success he had met with abroad. He brought in with him bank-notes to
the amount of £12,000, which he had received of some merchants he held a
correspondence with; at which my lord was well pleased, for he was
pretty near out of money at this juncture. After our son had delivered
the accounts and bills, and had withdrawn, I asked my lord, in a calm
tone, to give me the satisfaction of knowing in what manner the losses
he had complained to have suffered consisted. "You must consider, my
lord," said I, "that according to what you have been pleased to inform
me of, we are upwards of £2000 per annum, besides about £17,000 ready
money, poorer than we were when we first came to settle in Holland."

"You talk," replied my lord, "in a very odd manner. Do not you know that
I had children of my own by a former wife? and of these I have taken so
much care as to provide with very handsome fortunes, which are settled
irrevocably upon them. I have, Providence be thanked, given each of them
£5000, and that is laid in East India stock, sufficient to keep them
genteelly, above the frowns of fortune, and free from the fear of want.
This, joined to the money I mentioned to you before, as losses at sea,
deaths, and bankruptcies, your children's fortunes, which are larger
than my own children's, the buying the estate we live on, and several
other things, which my receipts and notes will account for, as you may
see after my decease. I have, to oblige you on this head, almost
descended to particulars, which I never thought to have done; but as I
have, rest yourself contented, and be well assured that I have not
wilfully thrown any of your substance away."

I could not tell what he meant by saying he had not wilfully thrown any
of my substance away. These words puzzled me, for I found by his
discourse I was to have but £500 of all I had brought him, at his
decease, which I looked upon to be near at hand. I had but one thing
that was any satisfaction to me, which was this: I was assured by him
that he had not bestowed above the £15,000 he mentioned to me, on his
children by his former wife; and, on an exact calculation, he made it
appear that he had bestowed on my son Thomas alone near £13,000 in
buying the plantation, shares in vessels, and merchandise, besides
several valuable presents sent to his wife, both by him and me; and as
for my daughter Susanna, she was very well married to a factor, with a
fortune of £2000 (which was a great sum of money for a woman to have who
was immediately to go to the East Indies), besides some handsome
presents given to her both by him and me. In fact, her fortune was, in
proportion, as large as her brother's, for there is but very few women
in England or Holland with £2000 fortune that would venture to the coast
of Malabar, even to have married an Indian king, much more to have gone
over with a person that no one could tell what reception he might meet
with, or might be recalled at the pleasure of the Company upon the least
distaste taken by the merchants against him. Neither would I, though her
own mother, hinder her voyage, for she had been the author of all the
misfortunes that happened to me; and if my speaking a word would have
saved her from the greatest torment, I believe I should have been quite
silent. And I had but one reason to allege for the girl's going so
hazardous a voyage, which is, she knew that the match was proposed by my
lord, and if he had not thought it would have been advantageous for her,
he would never have given £2000 to her husband as a fortune; and again,
as my lord was the only friend she had in our family, she was cunning
enough to know that the bare disobliging of him would have been her ruin
for ever after; to which I may add, that it is possible, as she had made
so much mischief about me, she was glad to get what she could and go out
of the way, for fear my lord and I should be friends; which, if that had
happened, she would have been told never to come to our house any more.

As my lord's death began to be daily the discourse of the family, I
thought that he might be more reconciled if I entered into the arguments
again, pro and con, which we had together before. I did so, but all I
could say was no satisfaction, till I importuned him on my knees, with a
flood of tears. "Madam," said he, "what would you have me do?" "Do, my
lord," said I, "only be so tender to my years and circumstances as to
alter your will, or, at least, add a codicil to it; I desire nothing
more, for I declare I had rather be a beggar, than live under my
child's jurisdiction." To this he agreed with some reluctance, and he
added a codicil to his will.

This pleased me greatly, and gave me comfort, for I dreaded nothing so
much, after all my high living, as being under any person, relation or
stranger, and whether they exercised any power over me or not.

I saw the lawyer come out of the chamber first, but was above asking him
any questions; the next were the executors and chaplain. I asked the
last how they came to have words. He did not answer me directly, but
begged to know whose pleasure it was to have the codicil annexed. "It
was mine, sir," replied I; "and it made me very uneasy before I could
have the favour granted." He only replied by saying, "Ah! poor lady, the
favour, as you are pleased to term it, is not calculated for any benefit
to you; think the worst you can of it."

I was terribly uneasy at what the chaplain had said, but I imagined to
myself that I could not be worse off than I thought I should be before
the codicil was annexed; and as he withdrew without saying any more, I
was fain to rest satisfied with what I had heard, and that amounted to
nothing.

The next day after this the physicians that attended my lord told him it
was time for him to settle his worldly affairs, and prepare himself for
a hereafter. I now found all was over, and I had no other hopes of his
life than the physicians' declaration of his being near his death. For
it often happens that the gentlemen of the faculty give out that a man
is near his death, to make the cure appear to be the effect of their
great skill in distempers and medicine; as others, when they cannot find
out the real disease, give out that a man's end is near, rather than
discover their want of judgment; and this I thought might be the case
with our doctors of physic.

Our son was still kept from the university, and lodged at the house of
one of his future guardians; but when he heard that his father was so
near his end, he was very little out of his presence, for he dearly
loved him. My lord sent the day before his death to lock and seal up all
the doors in his dwelling house at The Hague; and the steward had
orders, in case of my lord's decease, not to let anybody come in, not
even his lady (who had for some time lodged in the same house with her
lord), without an order from the executors.

The keys of the doors were carried to him, and as he saw his death
approach, he prepared for it, and, in fact, resigned up the keys of
everything to the executors, and having bid them all a farewell, they
were dismissed. The physicians waited; but as the verge of life
approached, and it was out of their power to do him any service, he gave
them a bill of £100 for the care they had taken of him, and dismissed
them.

I now went into the chamber, and kneeling by his bedside, kissed him
with great earnestness, and begged of him, if ever I had disobliged him
in any respect, to forgive me. He sighed, and said he most freely
forgave me everything that I had reason to think I had offended him in;
but he added, "If you had been so open in your conversation to me before
our marriage as to discover your family and way of life, I know not but
that I should have married you as I did. I might now have been in a good
state of health, and you many years have lived with all the honours due
to the Countess de Wintselsheim." These words drew tears from my eyes,
and they being the last of any consequence he said, they had the greater
impression upon me. He faintly bid me a long farewell, and said, as he
had but a few moments to live, he hoped I would retire, and leave him
with our son and chaplain. I withdrew into my own chamber, almost
drowned in tears, and my son soon followed me out, leaving the chaplain
with his father, offering up his prayers to Heaven for the receiving of
his soul into the blessed mansions of eternal bliss.

A few minutes after our son went into the chamber with me again, and
received his father's last blessing. The chaplain now saw him departing,
and was reading the prayer ordered by the Church for that occasion; and
while he was doing it, my lord laid his head gently on the pillow, and
turning on his left side, departed this life with all the calmness of a
composed mind, without so much as a groan, in the fifty-seventh year of
his age.

As soon as he was dead an undertaker was sent for, by order of the
executors, who met together immediately to open his will, and take care
of all my son's effects. I was present when it was opened and read; but
how terribly I was frightened at hearing the codicil repeated any person
may imagine by the substance of it, which was to this effect; that if I
had given me any more after his decease than the £500 he had left me,
the £500 left to his executors, and the £1000 of my son's estate (which
was now a year's interest), was to be given to such poor families at The
Hague as were judged to be in the greatest want of it; not to be divided
into equal sums, but every family to have according to their merit and
necessity. But this was not all. My son was tied down much harder; for
if it was known that he gave me any relief, let my condition be ever so
bad, either by himself, by his order, or in any manner of way, device,
or contrivance that he could think of, one-half of his estate, which was
particularly mentioned, was to devolve to the executors for ever; and if
they granted me ever so small a favour, that sum was to be equally
divided among the several parishes where they lived, for the benefit of
the poor.

Any person would have been surprised to have seen how we all sat staring
at each other; for though it was signed by all the executors, yet they
did not know the substance of it till it was publicly read, excepting
the chaplain; and he, as I mentioned before, had told me the codicil had
better never have been added.

I was now in a fine dilemma; had the title of a countess, with £500, and
nothing else to subsist on but a very good wardrobe of clothes, which
were not looked upon by my son and the executors to be my late lord's
property, and which were worth, indeed, more than treble the sum I had
left me.

I immediately removed from the lodgings, and left them to bury the body
when they thought proper, and retired to a lodging at a private
gentleman's house, about a mile from The Hague. I was now resolved to
find out Amy, being, as it were, at liberty; and accordingly went to the
house where she had lived, and finding that empty, inquired for her
among the neighbours, who gave various accounts of what had become of
her; but one of them had a direction left at his house where she might
be found. I went to the place and found the house shut up, and all the
windows broken, the sign taken down, and the rails and benches pulled
from before the door. I was quite ashamed to ask for her there, for it
was a very scandalous neighbourhood, and I concluded that Amy had been
brought to low circumstances, and had kept a house of ill-fame, and was
either run away herself, or was forced to it by the officers of justice.
However, as nobody knew me here, I went into a shop to buy some trifles,
and asked who had lived in the opposite house (meaning Amy's). "Really,
madam," says the woman, "I do not well know; but it was a woman who kept
girls for gentlemen; she went on in that wickedness for some time, till
a gentleman was robbed there of his watch and a diamond ring, on which
the women were all taken up, and committed to the house of correction;
but the young ones are now at liberty, and keep about the town." "Pray,"
said I, "what may have become of the old beast that could be the ruin of
those young creatures?" "Why, I do not well know," says she; "but I have
heard that, as all her goods were seized upon, she was sent to the
poorhouse; but it soon after appearing that she had the French disease
to a violent degree, was removed to a hospital to be taken care of, but
I believe she will never live to come out; and if she should be so
fortunate, the gentleman that was robbed, finding that she was the
guilty person, intends to prosecute her to the utmost rigour of the
law."

I was sadly surprised to hear this character of Amy; for I thought
whatever house she might keep, that the heyday of her blood had been
over. But I found that she had not been willing to be taken for an old
woman, though near sixty years of age; and my not seeing or hearing from
her for some time past was a confirmation of what had been told me.

I went home sadly dejected, considering how I might hear of her. I had
known her for a faithful servant to me, in all my bad and good fortune,
and was sorry that at the last such a miserable end should overtake her,
though she, as well as I, deserved it several years before.

A few days after I went pretty near the place I had heard she was, and
hired a poor woman to go and inquire how Amy ---- did, and whether she
was likely to do well. The woman returned, and told me that the matron,
or mistress, said, the person I inquired after died in a salivation two
days before, and was buried the last night in the cemetery belonging to
the hospital.

I was very sorry to hear of Amy's unhappy and miserable death; for when
she came first into my service she was really a sober girl, very witty
and brisk, but never impudent, and her notions in general were good,
till my forcing her, as it were, to have an intrigue with the jeweller.
She had also lived with me between thirty and forty years, in the
several stages of life as I had passed through; and as I had done
nothing but what she was privy to, so she was the best person in the
universal world to consult with and take advice from, as my
circumstances now were.

I returned to my lodgings much chagrined, and very disconsolate; for as
I had for several years lived at the pinnacle of splendour and
satisfaction, it was a prodigious heart-break to me now to fall from
upwards of £3000 per annum to a poor £500 principal.

A few days after this I went to see my son, the Earl of Wintselsheim. He
received me in a very courteous (though far from a dutiful) manner. We
talked together near an hour upon general things, but had no particular
discourse about my late lord's effects, as I wanted to have. Among
other things he told me that his guardians had advised him to go to the
university for four years longer, when he would come of age, and his
estate would be somewhat repaired; to which he said he had agreed; and
for that purpose all the household goods and equipages were to be
disposed of the next week, and the servants dismissed. I immediately
asked if it would be looked upon as an encroachment upon his father's
will if I took Isabel (who had been my waiting-maid ever since I came
from England) to live with me. "No, my lady," very readily replied he;
"as she will be dismissed from me, she is certainly at liberty and full
freedom to do for herself as soon and in the best manner she possibly
can." After this I stayed about a quarter of an hour with him, and then
I sent for Isabel, to know if she would come and live with me on her
dismission from her lord's. The girl readily consented, for I had always
been a good mistress to her; and then I went to my own lodgings in my
son's coach, which he had ordered to be got ready to carry me home.

Isabel came, according to appointment, about ten days after, and told me
the house was quite cleared both of men and movables, but said her lord
(meaning my son) was not gone to the university as yet, but was at one
of his guardians' houses, where he would stay about a month, and that he
intended to make a visit before his departure, which he did, attended by
my late chaplain; and I, being in handsome lodgings, received them with
all the complaisance and love as was possible, telling them that time
and circumstances having greatly varied with me, whatever they saw amiss
I hoped they would be so good as to look over it at that time, by
considering the unhappy situation of my affairs.

After this visit was over, and I had myself and Isabel to provide for,
handsome lodgings to keep (which were as expensive as they were fine),
and nothing but my principal money to live on (I mean what I happened to
have in my pocket at my lord's death, for I had not been paid my £500 as
yet), I could not manage for a genteel maintenance as I had done some
years before. I thought of divers things to lay my small sums out to
advantage, but could fix on nothing; for it always happens that when
people have but a trifle, they are very dubious in the disposal of it.

Having been long resolving in my mind, I at last fixed on merchandise as
the most genteel and profitable of anything else. Accordingly I went to
a merchant who was intimate with my late lord, and letting him know how
my circumstances were, he heartily condoled with me, and told me he
could help me to a share in two ships--one was going a trading voyage to
the coast of Africa, and the other a-privateering. I was now in a
dilemma, and was willing to have a share in the trader, but was dubious
of being concerned in the privateer; for I had heard strange stories
told of the gentlemen concerned in that way of business. Nay, I had
been told, but with what certainty I cannot aver, that there was a set
of men who took upon them to issue ships, and as they always knew to
what port they are bound, notice was sent to their correspondent abroad
to order out their privateers on the coast the other sailed, and they
knowing the loading, and the numbers of hands and guns were on board,
soon made prizes of the vessels, and the profits were equally divided,
after paying what was paid for their insurance, among them all.

However, I at last resolved, by the merchant's advice, to have a share
in the trader, and the next day he over-persuaded me to have a share in
the privateer also. But that I may not lay out my money before I have
it, it may not be amiss to observe that I went to the executors and
received my £500 at an hour's notice, and then went to the merchant's to
know what the shares would come to, and being told £1500, I was resolved
to raise the money; so I went home, and, with my maid Isabel, in two
days' time disposed of as many of my clothes as fetched me near £1100,
which, joined to the above sum, I carried to the merchant's, where the
writings were drawn, signed, sealed, and delivered to me in the presence
of two witnesses, who went with me for that purpose. The ships were near
ready for sailing; the trader was so well manned and armed, as well as
the privateer, that the partners would not consent to insure them, and
out they both sailed, though from different ports, and I depended on
getting a good estate between them.

When I was about this last ship a letter came from the count, my son,
full of tender expressions of his duty to me, in which I was informed
that he was going again to the university at Paris, where he should
remain four years; after that he intended to make the tour of Europe,
and then come and settle at The Hague. I returned him thanks in a letter
for his compliment, wished him all happiness, and a safe return to
Holland, and desired that he would write to me from time to time that I
might hear of his welfare, which was all I could now expect of him. But
this was the last time I heard from him, or he from me.

In about a month's time the news came that the privateer (which sailed
under British colours, and was divided into eight shares) had taken a
ship, and was bringing it into the Texel, but that it accidentally
foundered, and being chained to the privateer, had, in sinking, like to
have lost that too. Two or three of the hands got on shore, and came to
The Hague; but how terribly I was alarmed any one may judge, when I
heard the ship the privateer had was the Newfoundland merchantman, as I
had bought two shares in out of four. About two months after news was
current about The Hague of a privateer or merchantman, one of them of
the town, though not known which, having an engagement in the
Mediterranean, in which action both the privateer and trader was lost.
Soon after their names were publicly known, and, in the end, my partners
heard that they were our ships, and unhappily sailing under false
colours (a thing often practised in the time of war), and never having
seen each other, had, at meeting, a very smart engagement, each fighting
for life and honour, till two unfortunate shots; one of them, viz., the
privateer, was sunk by a shot between wind and water, and the trader
unhappily blown up by a ball falling in the powder-room. There were only
two hands of the trader, and three of the privateer, that escaped, and
they all fortunately met at one of the partners' houses, where they
confirmed the truth of this melancholy story, and to me a fatal loss.

What was to be done now? I had no money, and but few clothes left;
there, was no hope of subsistence from my son or his guardians; they
were tied down to be spectators of my misfortunes, without affording me
any redress, even if they would.

Isabel, though I was now reduced to the last penny, would live with me
still, and, as I observed before and may now repeat, I was in a pretty
situation to begin the world--upwards of sixty years of age, friendless,
scanty of clothes, and but very little money.

I proposed to Isabel to remove from lodgings and retire to Amsterdam,
where I was not known, and might turn myself into some little way of
business, and work for that bread now which had been too often
squandered away upon very trifles. And upon consideration I found myself
in a worse condition than I thought, for I had nothing to recommend me
to Heaven, either in works or thoughts; had even banished from my mind
all the cardinal and moral virtues, and had much more reason to hide
myself from the sight of God, if possible, than I had to leave The
Hague, that I might not be known of my fellow-creatures. And farther to
hasten our removing to Amsterdam, I recollected I was involved in debt
for money to purchase a share in the Newfoundland trader, which was
lost, and my creditors daily threatened me with an arrest to make me pay
them.

I soon discharged my lodgings and went with Isabel to Amsterdam, where I
thought, as I was advanced in years, to give up all I could raise in the
world, and on the sale of everything I had to go into one of the
Proveniers' houses, where I should be settled for life. But as I could
not produce enough money for it, I turned it into a coffee-house near
the Stadt-house, where I might have done well; but as soon as I was
settled one of my Hague creditors arrested me for a debt of £75, and I
not having a friend in the world of whom to raise the money, was, in a
shameful condition, carried to the common jail, where poor Isabel
followed me with showers of tears, and left me inconsolable for my great
misfortunes. Here, without some very unforeseen accident, I shall never
go out of it until I am carried to my grave, for which my much-offended
God prepare me as soon as possible.

_The continuation of the Life of Roxana, by Isabel Johnson, who had
been her waiting-maid, from the time she was thrown into jail to
the time of her death._

After my lady, as it was my duty to call her, was thrown into jail for a
debt she was unable to pay, she gave her mind wholly up to devotion.
Whether it was from a thorough sense of her wretched state, or any other
reason, I could never learn; but this I may say, that she was a sincere
penitent, and in every action had all the behaviour of a Christian. By
degrees all the things she had in the world were sold, and she began to
find an inward decay upon her spirits. In this interval she repeated all
the passages of her ill-spent life to me, and thoroughly repented of
every bad action, especially the little value she had for her children,
which were honestly born and bred. And having, as she believed, made her
peace with God, she died with mere grief on the 2nd of July 1742, in the
sixty-fifth year of her age, and was decently buried by me in the
churchyard belonging to the Lutherans, in the city of Amsterdam.

THE END.